Project Gutenberg's The Life of Sophia Jex-Blake, by Margaret Georgina Todd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Life of Sophia Jex-Blake

Author: Margaret Georgina Todd

Release Date: February 21, 2017 [EBook #54215]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE ***




Produced by KD Weeks, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs or quotations in
which they are referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Only the
most egregious of these have been corrected if they occur within quoted
text, particularly juvenile matter. Please see the transcriber’s note at
the end of this text for details regarding the handling of any textual
issues encountered during its preparation.




                      THE LIFE OF SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE




                          _By the same Author_

                  ------------------------------------

                              MONA MACLEAN
                           FELLOW TRAVELLERS
                               WINDYHAUGH
                           THE WAY OF ESCAPE
                                 GROWTH

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration:

  _Samuel Laurence pinx._         _Emery Walker ph. sc._
  _Sophia Jex-Blake_
  _at the age of 25_
]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE LIFE OF

                            SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE

                                   BY

                          MARGARET TODD, M.D.

                            (GRAHAM TRAVERS)








                       MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
                      ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON
                                  1918








                              _COPYRIGHT_








                GLASGOW: PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
                    BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO. LTD.








                              TO ALL THOSE
                    MENTIONED IN THE FOLLOWING PAGES
                             OR PASSED OVER
                    FROM IGNORANCE OR WANT OF SPACE,
                        WHO LENT A HELPING HAND
                   TO A BRAVE AND UNSELFISH FIGHTER,
                              THIS BOOK IS
                          GRATEFULLY DEDICATED








                                PREFACE


There are several reasons why it has seemed worth while to write the
life of Sophia Jex-Blake at some length.

1. She was one of the people who really do live. In the present day a
woman is fitted into her profession almost as a man is. Sixty years ago
a highly dowered girl was faced by a great venture, a great quest. The
life before her was an uncharted sea. She had to find her self, to find
her way, to find her work. In many respects youth was incomparably the
most interesting period of a life history.

2. S. J.-B. has left behind her (as probably no woman of equal power has
done) the record of this quest. She was a born chronicler: almost in her
babyhood she struggled laboriously to get on to paper her doings and
dreams; and she was truthful to a fault. We have here the kind of thing
that is constantly “idealised” in present day fiction,—have it in actual
contemporary record,—with the added interest that here the story begins
in an old-world conservative medium, and passes through the life of the
modern educated working girl into the history of a great movement, of
which the chronicler was indeed _magna pars_. The reader will see how
more and more as the years went on S. J.-B.’s motto became “Not me, but
us,” till one is tempted to say that she _was_ the movement, that she
stood, as it were, for women.

3. That, so to speak, was her “job”; but she never grew one-sided; never
forgot the man’s point of view. No woman ever took a saner and wider
view of human affairs.

4. In spite of the heavy strain thrown by conflicting outlook and ideals
on the relation between parents and child, the reader will see in the
following pages how that relationship was preserved. This is perhaps the
most remarkable thing in the whole history, and it is full of
significance and helpful suggestion for us all in these critical days.

5. And lastly, it proved impossible to write the life in any other way.
When S. J.-B. was a young woman, Samuel Laurence was asked by her
parents to make a crayon drawing of her. After some hours’ work, he
threw down his pencil. “I must get you in oils or not at all,” he said.

Those words have often been in the mind of the author of this book.




                                CONTENTS

                                _PART I_

                               CHAPTER I
                                                              PAGE
      CHILDHOOD                                                  1
         Birth, parentage and descent—Early influences—
           “Sweet Sackermena.”

                               CHAPTER II
      SCHOOL LIFE                                               11
         A “terrible pickle”—Home letters—Holidays—“Poems”—
           A confession.

                              CHAPTER III
      SCHOOL LIFE—_Continued_                                   24
         Indifferent health—Various educational
           experiments—S. J.-B.’s character as seen by her
           schoolfellows.

                               CHAPTER IV
      SCHOOL LIFE—_Concluded_                                   35
         Leaves school abruptly—Fresh start—Illness of her
           mother and sister—Letter from her father—
           Confirmation.

                               CHAPTER V
      LIFE AT HOME                                              50
         Friendship with her mother—Dreams of authorship—
           Self-centred life—Makes acquaintance of Norfolk
           cousins.

                               CHAPTER VI
      LIFE AT QUEEN’S COLLEGE                                   62
         Comes into touch with Feminist movement—Goes to
           Queen’s College—Friction—Hunt for lodgings—Is
           appointed mathematical tutor—Correspondence with
           her father as to accepting payment for her work—
           Certificate won “with great credit.”

                              CHAPTER VII
      FRIENDSHIP                                                78
         All-round development—Capacity for friendship and
           service—Friendship with Miss Octavia Hill.

                              CHAPTER VIII
      A STEP BEYOND                                             95
         Confidence in her mother—Fresh dedication of her
           life.

                               CHAPTER IX
      FIRST EXPERIENCE OF EDINBURGH                            103
         The problem of realizing the vision—Goes to study
           educational methods in Edinburgh—Chequered
           experiences—Church-going and religious
           difficulties—Consults Rev. Dr. Pulsford—Letters
           from her mother—An “increasing purpose.”

                               CHAPTER X
      GERMANY                                                  117
         Miss Garrett’s efforts to obtain medical
           education—Comes to prospect in Edinburgh—She and
           S. J.-B. go canvassing together—Disappointment—
           S. J.-B.’s desire to study educational methods
           farther afield—Germany—Göttingen—Mannheim—
           Appointed English teacher at Grand-ducal
           Institute.

                               CHAPTER XI
      LIFE AS A TEACHER AT MANNHEIM                            129
         Letters to her mother—Success of her work—
           Transient wave of unpopularity—Letter to her
           mother on Biblical criticism.

                              CHAPTER XII
      VARIOUS PROJECTS AND VENTURES                            147
         Return home delayed by scarlet fever—Death of a
           college friend—Mr. Plumptre recommends S. J.-B.
           as founder and Lady Principal of modern Girls’
           School at Manchester.

                              CHAPTER XIII
      A VISIT TO SOME AMERICAN SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES            159
         Opposition of parents—Goes to Boston—Makes
           acquaintance of Dr. Lucy Sewall—R. W. Emerson—
           Dinner at the Emersons—Visits Niagara—Inspects
           various colleges (Oberlin, Hillsdale, St. Louis,
           Antioch) and schools—Correspondence with her
           brother—Views on American education.

                              CHAPTER XIV
      QUESTIONINGS                                             172
         Gets to know women doctors in Boston—Assists with
           dispensing in New England Hospital for Women—
           Gradual initiation into hospital work—Heart-
           searchings as to her own future—Law?—The
           Ministry?—Religious difficulties—Medicine?

                               CHAPTER XV
      PIONEER WORK IN AMERICA                                  188
         Writes “A Visit”—Published by Macmillan—Good
           reviews—Begins study of medicine—Application to
           Harvard—Letters from Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes
           and Dr. Brown-Séquard—Obtains clinical teaching
           in Massachusetts General Hospital—Goes to New
           York—Obtains private teaching in anatomy—Summing
           up of three years in America.

                              CHAPTER XVI
      GOING HOME                                               202
         Visit of Dr. Sewall to England—Rapprochement
           between S. J.-B. and her father—Dr. Elizabeth
           and Dr. Emily Blackwell found Medical College
           for Women in New York—S. J.-B. starts house-
           keeping and medical study there—Illness of her
           father—Return to England.


                               _PART II_

                               CHAPTER I
      DRIFTING                                                 213

         Life at Brighton—Perplexities as to future
           education.

                               CHAPTER II
      AT THE GATES OF THE CITADEL                              218
         Correspondence with Mrs. Butler, Professor
           Sidgwick and others as to possibility of
           University training—Goes to Edinburgh—Canvasses
           professors.

                              CHAPTER III
      SUCCESS?                                                 232
         Support of _Scotsman_—Formal application to Dean
           of Medical Faculty—Consent (_a_) of Medical
           Faculty, (_b_) of Senatus, to receive S. J.-B.
           as a student.


                               CHAPTER IV
      A CHECK                                                  242
         S. J.-B.’s run of popularity—Difficulties of
           situation—Decision of Senatus vetoed by
           University Court.

                               CHAPTER V
      OPENING OF EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY TO WOMEN                 253
         S. J.-B. reinforced by Mrs. Thorne and Miss
           Pechey—Dr. King Chambers tries—and fails—to get
           women admitted to St. Mary’s Hospital—Edinburgh
           University Court agrees to admit women to
           separate classes.

                               CHAPTER VI
      THE HOPE SCHOLARSHIP                                     262
         More lady students—_Cives Academiae Edinensis_—
           Difficulty of getting teachers—Miss Pechey
           deprived of Hope Scholarship—Newspaper support
           and opposition—Differences among professors.

                              CHAPTER VII
      PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES                                   276
         Science classes—Efforts to get anatomical
           teaching—Correspondence in the _Lancet_.

                              CHAPTER VIII
      THE RIOT AT SURGEONS’ HALL                               285
         Women begin study of anatomy—Apply for admission
           to Royal Infirmary—Opposition and support—The
           riot—Defence of women students by “Irish
           Brigade” and other friendly students—Great
           newspaper controversy—Annual Meeting of Royal
           Infirmary—Crowded audience—Removal to St. Giles’
           Church—S. J.-B. speaks—The first woman since
           Jenny Geddes to speak in that place—Professor
           Christison’s protest and S. J.-B.’s retort—
           Hubbub—“Fighting with beasts at Ephesus”—
           Formation of “National Association.”

                               CHAPTER IX
      THE ACTION FOR LIBEL                                     306
         Dr. Christison’s assistant brings action for libel
           against S. J.-B.—Her brother’s support—She
           speaks at suffrage meeting in London—Makes
           acquaintance of Rt. Hon. James Stansfeld—The
           action for libel—Damages one farthing, but heavy
           costs—Criticisms of the verdict.

                               CHAPTER X
      SOME FRIENDSHIPS AND HOLIDAYS                            320
         £1000 raised by public subscription to defray
           costs of action—S. J.-B. takes holiday in Paris—
           Commune—Visit of Dr. Lucy Sewall to England.

                               CHAPTER XI
      THE QUESTION OF PROFESSIONAL EXAMINATION                 330
         Continued practical difficulty in getting teaching
           and as to professional examination—Counsel’s
           opinion taken by both sides—Friendly professors
           and others—Women refused entrance to first
           professional examination, but in response to
           lawyer’s letter are admitted and pass—Move and
           countermove.

                              CHAPTER XII
      THE ROYAL INFIRMARY                                      340
         Marriage of several of the lady students—
           Continuance of struggle in Edinburgh together
           with enquiries as to chances elsewhere—Sympathy
           of Professor Sidgwick and Mr. James Stuart—Rev.
           Dr. Guthrie—Infirmary Annual Meeting again—
           Success of the Women’s party—“Ring out the
           old!”—Question of legality of votes of firms—
           Litigation—Success—S. J.-B. a public character.

                              CHAPTER XIII
      THE ACTION AGAINST THE SENATUS                           352
         _Impasse_—Friends and well-wishers advise appeal
           to Court of Law—University Court suggests that
           lady matriculated students should give up right
           to graduation and be content with certificates
           of proficiency—S. J.-B. and others bring Action
           of Declarator against Senatus to define
           position—Much searching of archives for
           evidence—Senatus decides to defend action, but
           six professors dissent.

                              CHAPTER XIV
      THE LORD ORDINARY’S JUDGMENT                             362
         S. J.-B. lectures in London on the whole
           situation—Lord Shaftesbury in chair—Difference
           with Mrs. Butler—S. J.-B. publishes _Medical
           Women_—Lord Ordinary decides substantially in
           favour of women students—Widespread
           congratulations.

                               CHAPTER XV
      PAYING THE PRICE                                         377
         Many claims, medical, legal, journalistic, etc.,
           on S. J.-B.—Gift of £1000 from Mr. Walter
           Thomson—S. J.-B. is rejected in first
           professional examination—Newspaper interest and
           enquiries—Sympathy.

                              CHAPTER XVI
      END OF THE BATTLE IN EDINBURGH                           388
         Interest of Rt. Hon. James Stansfeld—Introduces S.
           J.-B. to some of his colleagues in the Cabinet—
           S. J.-B. works hard and successfully for first
           election of women on Edinburgh School Board—
           University appeals against Lord Ordinary’s
           decision—Persevering efforts of all the women
           students to get on with their education somehow
           and somewhere—St. Andrews—Durham—Ireland—
           Edinburgh Court of Session (thirteen judges)
           decides by narrow majority in favour of
           University—The judgment of the Lord Justice
           Clerk.

                              CHAPTER XVII
      THE QUESTION IN PARLIAMENT                               398
         Increasing public and newspaper interest and
           criticism—Mrs. Anderson writes to _Times_,
           strongly advising women to study abroad and
           practise without registration—S. J.-B. replies—
           University censured in press—Apologia of
           Principal and S. J.-B.’s reply—Sir David
           Wedderburn’s notice of Bill to reduce vote to
           Scottish Universities by amount of salaries of
           Edinburgh professors withdrawn on hearing of
           Lord Ordinary’s judgment—S. J.-B. again
           interviews Home Secretary and members of
           Cabinet—Things looking well when Gladstone
           dissolves Parliament and appeals to country!—S.
           J.-B. interviews Mr. Russell Gurney and others—
           At Mr. Cowper Temple’s request she and her
           solicitor draft “A Bill to remove doubts as to
           the power of Scottish Universities”—She is
           summoned to London to discuss matter—Bill
           introduced and sixty-five petitions at once
           presented in its favour—Fails to get through—In
           debate on motion the two members for Edinburgh
           (Town and Gown) join issue.

                             CHAPTER XVIII
      THE LONDON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE FOR WOMEN                  415
         Discussion in Parliament calls all latent
           opposition into play—S. J.-B.’s failure to pass
           examination used as weapon against the women—She
           questions justice of rejection—A great mistake—
           Reproaches—By advice of Dr. Anstie and Mr.
           Norton she founds the London School of Medicine
           for Women—Miss Irby’s visit to it.

                              CHAPTER XIX
      THE RUSSELL GURNEY ENABLING ACT                          423
         Difference between S. J.-B. and Mrs. Anderson, who
           nevertheless joins Council of School—Mr. Cowper
           Temple brings forward his Bill again, and, after
           defeat, brings forward a “Foreign Degrees Bill,”
           which is also defeated—Lord Sandon on behalf of
           Government admits importance of question—Mr.
           Simon suggests that women should qualify by
           means of examination in Midwifery only, as was
           then possible—This agreed to after legal
           enquiries, and the women students send in their
           names, but examiners resign—S. J.-B.’s longing
           to break away and do rough hospital work in
           Bosnia—Deputation to President of Privy Council—
           “Foreign Degrees Bill” again defeated, but
           Government intimate to Mr. Russell Gurney that
           he should bring in an “Enabling Bill”—Though
           late in session this passes and becomes law—Miss
           Pechey and Miss Shove induce Irish College to
           avail itself of ability conferred by new Act—
           _The Woman Hater_.

                               CHAPTER XX
      AT LAST                                                  436
         S. J.-B. and Miss Pechey study and graduate at
           Berne, and obtain Licence of Irish College.

                              CHAPTER XXI
      THE ROYAL FREE HOSPITAL                                  441
         Hospital training still refused to the women
           coming on—Mr. Stansfeld introduces S. J.-B. to
           Chairman of Royal Free Hospital, whom he has
           already interested in the matter—R.F.H. opened
           to women—Opening of London University to women—
           In organisation of London School for Women, S.
           J.-B. is set aside—Mrs. Thorne becomes Hon.
           Secretary—_persona grata_—Retrospect.


                               _PART III_

                               CHAPTER I
      EARLY DAYS IN PRACTICE                                   455
         Special difficulties of women doctors in general
           and of S. J.-B. in particular—Opens Dispensary—
           Assistance of distinguished Edinburgh doctors—
           Early success—Letters to colleagues and friends—
           Views on Suffrage and on life in general.

                               CHAPTER II
      LAST ILLNESS OF MRS. JEX-BLAKE                           470
         S. J.-B. called south for last time—Unavailing
           efforts—Death of Mrs. Jex-Blake.

                              CHAPTER III
      PATIENTS AND FRIENDS                                     476
         S. J.-B. removes to Bruntsfield Lodge—Letters to
           old friends—Interest in education of girls—Views
           on problems and mysteries of life—Paying and
           non-paying guests—Beginnings of Edinburgh
           Hospital for Women and Children—Her love of
           poetry—Her books.

                               CHAPTER IV
      PUBLIC LIFE                                              490
         Interest in all public questions relating to
           women—Too masterful and uncompromising in
           working with others—Publishes _The Care of
           Infants_—Her coöperation much in demand in
           parliamentary business—Assists Edinburgh
           lecturers in their efforts to obtain charter—
           Efforts fail, but examinations of Conjoint
           Colleges thrown open to women—Re-publication of
           _Medical Women_—_The Englishwoman’s Year Book_—
           Health Lecture to Women—Founding of Edinburgh
           School of Medicine for Women—Its difficulties—
           Opposition.

                               CHAPTER V
      RE-OPENING OF EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY TO WOMEN              502
         S. J.-B. writes article for _Nineteenth Century_—
           Views on marriage, etc.—Her Hindu students—
           Appointed a lecturer on Midwifery in the Extra-
           Mural School—Death of Dr. Lucy Sewall—S. J.-B.’s
           renewed efforts to gain admission for women to
           St. Andrews—Final appeal to her own Alma Mater
           “to decide a question which has been under
           consideration for twenty-five years”—Success—
           Congratulations from members of “National
           Association”—S. J.-B.’s characteristics as
           doctor and as citizen.

                               CHAPTER VI
      DRIVING TOURS. ANIMAL FRIENDS                            513

                              CHAPTER VII
      THE SABBATICAL YEAR                                      523
         Search for a suitable house—Send-off from friends
           in Edinburgh—Windydene—Life in retirement—Fruit-
           growing—Dairy—Friends—Books—Winters abroad—
           Interest in public affairs—Distrust of Germany—
           Suffrage—Death of Professor Masson—S. J.-B.’s
           religious attitude—Health—Last illness.

                               APPENDICES

      A. Pedigree of the Jex-Blake family. Origin of           543
           compound surname

      B. “Words for the Way.”—No. 2. Rest                      544

      C. Conclusions from “A Visit to American Schools and     548
           Colleges”

      D. The Edinburgh Extra-Mural School                      551

      E. Letter to the _Times_ in reply to Mrs. Garrett        552
           Anderson

      F. Letter to the _Times_ in reply to the Principal of    555
           Edinburgh University

      G. Permanent Memorials of S. J.-B.                       563

         INDEX                                                 565




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

    SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE                                _Frontispiece_
       From a painting by Samuel Laurence

    THOMAS JEX-BLAKE                               _To face p._ 70
       From a drawing in chalks by Henry T.
         Wells, R.A.

    MARIA EMILY JEX-BLAKE                          ”             384
       From a drawing in chalks by Henry T.
         Wells, R.A.

    SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE                               ”             484




                                _PART I_




  Our great interest in biography is due to the desire to see that the
  “child is father to the man”; in other words, to see how, from boyhood
  to manhood and from manhood to old age, through all change of
  circumstances and all widening of intellectual and practical
  interests, we can detect the same unique, individual nature, and link
  each new expression of it in speech and action with that which
  preceded it.

                                                           EDWARD CAIRD.




                               CHAPTER I
                               CHILDHOOD


Sophia Jex-Blake was born on the 21st January, 1840. “How happy I was
with my Baby this time two and twenty years ago!” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake
on the 21st January, 1862, and, if she had greater cause than some
mothers for the plaintive note that one seems to hear through the words,
she was the first to rejoice in her great compensations.

Certainly no baby ever had a warmer welcome into the world. At the time
of her birth, her father, Mr. Thomas Jex-Blake, a proctor of Doctors’
Commons, was living the life of a retired gentleman with his wife at 3
Croft Place, Hastings. Both parents, though no longer young, and in some
ways older than their years, were devotedly fond of children, and a
number of disappointments had shadowed their married life. In January,
1840, their son, Thomas William, was eight years of age, and their
daughter, Caroline, a staid little maiden of six. The home was crying
out for a real baby, and all were prepared to treat the newcomer as a
little queen.

And most royally did the little queen step into the position lying at
her feet. There was no doubt at all that _she_ meant to live. She was
vital to the finger-tips, a thoroughly wholesome little animal, with a
pair of great luminous eyes, too mature for a baby, though they retained
the child look for three score years and ten.

The Baby came of an excellent stock.[1] On both sides she was descended
from well-known Norfolk families, whose lineage will be found in Burke’s
_Landed Gentry_. Her father was the son of William Jex-Blake of Swanton
Abbots, and her mother the daughter of Thomas Cubitt of Honing Hall. It
sounds old-world and picturesque, like Trollope’s novels or a landscape
by Constable.

Footnote 1:

  Appendix A.

On the other hand, the Baby—as in later years she never tired of saying—
“came in with the penny post.” New ideas were surging up on every side.
When one thinks of her parentage, her heredity, and the tendencies of
the world outside, one can scarcely imagine a more varied lot of
elements from which to build up a life. Of the fairies who came to her
christening, some brought great gifts, and some great opportunities,
and, when the cradle was full, one can almost hear them say,—“What now,
little girl, will you make of that?”

Of all the gifts we know well which she considered the greatest. “No
child ever had better parents than I!” “How I wish you had known my
Mother!” Such words were constantly on her lips. Throughout life, when
she was making holiday, she loved to go back to old Hastings, to point
out to some intimate friend the house where she was born, the church—St.
Clement’s—where she was baptised; to wander about the old castle, and
note the very rocks which had afforded the most delightful scrambling-
ground when she was a child. There was a special point in some country
walk associated with the picture of her Father bending his tall figure
to hold her hand, while he talked to her of “the terrible things people
were doing in France.”

“No one ever had a happier childhood than I.”

In many ways she was extraordinarily fortunate in her parents. One
cannot go through the long series of carefully preserved letters written
to their youngest child without feeling tempted to say that better
people never lived. Absolutely upright in all their dealings, devoted
and unselfish in their affection, single-heartedly religious, regarding
themselves strictly as stewards of the wealth Providence had bestowed on
them, they really were the fine flower of old Evangelical Anglicanism.
One seldom sees a husband and wife so entirely of one mind as to what
are the things that matter. And if the Mother—Maria Emily Cubitt—was the
one to bring to the union the keen wit, the happy humour, which her
children inherited and loved to recall, her husband was the first to
acknowledge and rejoice in her gifts. He was her proud lover to the day
of his death. Family tradition made it a matter of course that they
should have a luxurious home, and that all the appointments of their
life should be good, but the note of self-denial was always telling
resolutely and unobtrusively. It was her younger daughter’s boast in
later years that Mrs. Jex-Blake “would have made a splendid poor man’s
wife;” and the vulgar criticism was significant of their whole attitude
towards life, that “the Jex-Blake’s carriage was as fine as any in the
place, but _there was always a poor person in it_”.

What made this attitude all the finer was the fact that neither husband
nor wife was ever tempted to undervalue social distinctions. It was
_noblesse oblige_ always,—the _noblesse_ of family as much as the
_noblesse_ of Christ.

Surely better people never lived, and yet, as human standards go, the
world which they built around them was scarcely a spacious world. “I
have learnt far more from my children than they ever learned from me,”
Mrs. Jex-Blake used to say with characteristic generosity in her old
age, and hers was one of the minds that grow and develop up to the last:
but in some ways the Evangelicalism of her middle life—even with the
advantage of her most gracious representation of its tenets—was a
cramping thing. While Caroline and Sophia were still in the nursery,
their parents had resolved, from the best of motives, to deny them the
social advantages which their mother had enjoyed before them. Dancing
and theatre-going were wrong; novels were mainly trash; _Punch_ was
“vulgar”. “Christ’s kingdom” was the one thing worth considering—
Christ’s kingdom as represented by the popular preachers of the day.
“The mission field” was the great object of enthusiasm. After reading
much contemporary correspondence one is tempted to say that the making
of pen-wipers and book-markers for missionary bazaars was the work fitly
to be expected of a Christian gentleman’s daughter.

From her cradle the elder sister seems to have accepted this view of
life. Her fine and massive intellect bowed to the limitations imposed
upon it. Her strong character asserted itself in many ways, but never so
as to give her parents the proverbial “hour’s anxiety”.

And, for better or worse, into this atmosphere Sophia Jex-Blake was
born. One can scarcely wonder that she came as a little queen. “Brother”
was already at school, his foot on the first step of a brilliant career;
“Sweet Carrie” was all that loving parents expected her to be; the new
thing came as a complete surprise. The freshness, the wilfulness, the
naughtiness of her were as the wine of life to these staid, law-abiding
people. It took their breath away sometimes, but it was all on so small
a scale, and were not all the forces of religion in reserve to check any
undue waywardness as soon as she was old enough to understand?

The earliest samples of her handwriting are two letters addressed to her
brother,—undated, but written laboriously in “half-text” between double
lines. The quotation and punctuation marks are added by another hand.

           “DEAR BROTHER,
                     Your note was much ‘amiss,’
                     But as you sent sixpence,
                     I pardon the offence,
                     And kindly send you this.
                                                 S. L. J. B.”

and again:

  “DEAR BROTHER,

        I must say I think you very impertinent, however I condescend to
  write to you. If you write a word more nonsense your head shall be
  off. I am your humble servant grand mogul.”

“_Entirely_ her own composition” is the postscript added in her father’s
handwriting.

No doubt they spoilt her, and she must still have been very young when
her audacity and wilfulness began to cause her parents real anxiety. In
January, 1847, her Mother writes:

  “DEAR SOPHY,

        I am very pleased with your marker, I think it nicely done for
  you. I wish you many happy returns of your birthday—now you are seven
  years old I hope you will pray for the Holy Spirit to keep you from
  sin, from disobedience, and from violence of temper. I send you as a
  text for your birthday 16 Proverbs 32, and I trust you will try hard
  to act upon it.... I hope you take all the care you can of dear Papa—
  he says you are very good. Brother sends love.

                          I am your affectionate Mother,
                                             MARIA EMILY JEX-BLAKE.”

A day or two later she writes again:

  “I am very glad to hear you had such a happy birthday—how kind in Mary
  to give you that nice tea-pot. I hope you remember to thank God for
  giving you so many kind friends. Be sure to take all the care you can
  of dear Papa, and if he takes you for a walk do not let him talk.

  I miss Papa’s nice explaining God’s word every morning at prayers, you
  must tell me what it has been about.

  We like Brighton and I think I am stronger, but we shall be very glad
  to be home again. I hope Mary takes care about the poor people’s broth
  and the puddings for the sick children. I long to see all my poor
  friends again, but I trust some one visits them and that they do not
  miss me. Papa must go and read with Mrs. P. when he is able and with
  Mrs. C.... Ask Mr. Macleane to bring you back with him in his pocket,
  when he returns on Monday. Show him how quiet you can be.”

It is clear the teaching of religion had already begun, if indeed there
was ever a time when it had not,—the teaching of such genuine heartfelt
religion!—under symbols that never were suited to the mind of a
sensitive child. So it is not surprising that she was not always the
Grand Mogul, poor little soul! The next papers that survive are in a
totally different vein. They are written when she was seven or eight
years old, and the handwriting, though far from beautiful, is much
better formed.

  “DEAR MRS. BLAKE,

        I wish you would be so kind as to come and see me every night in
  Bed-ford-shire at least tonight on Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday
  Thursday Friday Saturday and next Sunday after tomorrow. I require an
  answer to this note (letter) even if you do come tonight. There are
  now so many railroads that you can get to Bedfordshire in one minute.
  Please send ‘Madam Mary’ with this and then come up.

                                                      GRANDAFLORER.”

The true inwardness of this request appears in a private paper probably
of an earlier date, folded up and labelled on the outside, “A Prayer to
be Said After an unhappy Night.”

  “Oh Lord I beseech Thee take away my fears of a night, for Thou alone
  knowest what miseries I this night have suffered. O Lord, I beseech
  Thee this day enable me to behave as I ought. O Lord, I beseech Thee
  to make me a Christain child ... take away my doubts and fears....”

In the next letter—endorsed by her Mother, “7th May, 1848”—she says,

  “I whant to tell you that I feel so much less fear of a night....

  “I will never say again (as I fear I often have) that God does not
  hear my prayer or that I do not derive comfort from it.... Please (for
  you say please wins everything) do not show this to anybody not even
  to dear Papa.

                                                        S. L. B.”[2]

Footnote 2:

  The paragraphs and brackets are the writer’s own.

Clearly the child at this time was learning to read and write. Of any
formal teaching no record has been kept, but, if anything of the kind
existed, it can have made no great demand on her brain power, which
began at this time to find expression in a somewhat unusual way.

In common with most children, she dreamed dreams, but her dreams were
not the random visions of an hour. They were singularly coherent and
consecutive, aiming at nothing less than the construction of an ideal
state ruled by a “despotic emperor” in some wonderful islands lying in
an unknown sea. She was unable to throw the creations of her brain into
anything like literary form, but numberless papers have been preserved,
varying from large official-looking blue foolscap sheets giving the
“constitution” of the state, down to tiny scraps about the minutest
detail connected with it.

There are many maps of the islands, of which the largest, Sackermena,
gave its name to the group; and these are supplemented by numberless
poems in which she strove to give expression to the feelings her Utopia
aroused in her mind. Poetry never came easy to her, dearly as she loved
it.

She begins gallantly many times: (We all know the experience.)

                 “See how pretily the sunbeams dance
                 Upon the fair waves of Speed-the-lance
                 See the Waters of Gold!”

and again,

               “See Lord Grandaflora brave
               Fighting his country and life to save....”

and again,

                  “See how gently Mordisca rules
                  O’er Sackermena and her pooles....”

or is it “fooles”?—The writing is very bad.

On the whole the most delightful stanza is the one that was probably the
first,

                   “Sweet Sackermena and her isles
                   See how many yards and miles
                   It takes to go round Sackermena!”

No, poetry never came easy to her.

When she tackles the constitution of the state, however, her work is on
a totally different level. She gives us the officers, “Military, Civil,
and Judicial,” the standing army, standing navy, Men of War _and_
frigates, and vessels “in rest, ready to be raised.” From this we go on
to Prisons, Castles, Laws, Parliament, Guards, etc. The population
varies greatly in different schemes. In one, by a stroke of genius, all
innocent of that terrible Woman Question in which she was to play so
prominent a part, she says:—Men, 7,000,000; Women, 5,000,000. Truly an
ideal state!

There are many codes of laws, drawn up to meet one contingency after
another. The following are picked out almost at random:

  “The Despotic Emperor has authority that none may dispute and none may
  appear in his presence without his gracious permission save his sons
  and Lord Field Marshall, also the chief general the high Admiral the
  high Treasurer, high Chancellor, Secretary of state and the Chief
  Justice.”

  “Succession to the Crown. It is at the option of the Reigning Despotic
  Emperor to name his successor but if he dies without making any choice
  it descends to the eldest son but if he has no son the crown is placed
  on the head of the eldest daughter unless 12 _strong_ reasons can be
  urged to the contrary and accepted by Parliament. If he has no
  offspring it does not descend to the next relation but it is in the
  power of the parliament to give it to whoever it pleases.”

  “Robery shall always be punished by the culprits restoring fourfold or
  if utterly unable to pay this as many days imprisonment as there are
  shillings in the forfeit.”

  “Intentional murder and personal injury shall be punished by injuries
  precisely similar.”

  “If any man conceals the persons mentioned in the preceding laws he is
  punished half as much as the offender.”

  “That every English or Scotchman that is travelling with a passport
  shall be supplied with provisions cost free. And every Frenchman shall
  have things for half and every Dutchman quarter price. Any one
  infringing this law is liable to be forced into the army with the
  possibility of advancement or to be imprisoned for two years.”

  “No judge shall ever condemn a man to death without the knowledge of
  Lord Trican. An infringement of this law shall be visited by
  confiscation of all his estates except (if he have it) 250 to his wife
  and 300 to each of his children; besides his being degraded from
  office and receiving 30 stripes in the public square of St. Anhola.”

  “All disobedience to officers shall be punished by flogging. 1st
  offence 20 strokes, 2nd. 34, 3rd. 40, 4th. imprisonment 4 months, 5th.
  14 months, 6th. Death.”

  “If any sentinel be found asleep in the camp he shall be shot with
  blank cartridges and imprised 15 months. The second offence he shall
  be shot really.”

  “Spirits or strong drink not being allowed in either army or navy any
  person having any shall be shot with blank cartridges and the second
  offence he shall receive 20 strokes and 1 months imprisonment, 3rd. 32
  strokes and 4 months imprisonment. 4th. Death.”

  “In time of war when the standing army is not sufficient to resist the
  enemy’s forces 350 soldiers and 4 captains and 10 lieutenants shall be
  sent to raise the ready militia to the amount required; if this is not
  enough every man above 20 and under 80 compose the Possiblees which is
  raised in great danger, but 2,500,000 must be left (all able bodied
  men) to take care of the kingdom.”

In many respects this state was a primitive one. When certain
announcements were to be made, “a large bell is rung which is heard to
the distance of 23 miles,” or “an enormous bonfire is made in the palace
gardens of Mt. Gilbow [!] which is perhaps seen to a greater distance.”

This is fine:

  “The Despotic Emperor is the grand Law-giver General Judge Sage
  Physician and in short the Father of his vast dominions.”

In spite of the mass of prosaic detail as to dress, provisions, etc.,
there is sometimes a hint of the supernatural about the whole thing. The
dotted lines between the islands in one of the maps indicate “invisible
bridges”, and in a request to “VICTORIA and PRINCE ALBERT” that a
governor may be sent from England to “controll the foreigners who
wilfully destroy the peace and comfort of this happy and well-governed
realm,” we are told that “if this wish is complied with, the Most
Gracious Despotic Emperor, PHRAMPTON OMAIL GRANDIFLORA,[3] will stand
the friend of your kingdoms on earth and admit 20 of your subjects to
his unearthly Kingdom.”

Footnote 3:

  Note the similarity of the name to her signature on p. 5. Many a
  little girl has loved to imagine herself a fairy princess. It would be
  interesting to know whether any other ever dreamed of being a
  “Despotic Emperor.”

A great impetus to the whole conception may possibly have been given by
a tour which the child was fortunate enough to make with her parents and
sister to Warwickshire and thence to Scotland in June, 1850, a tour of
which further particulars will be found in the next chapter. In the
course of her very conscientiously kept diary, she says, “We read the
Lady of the Lake aloud,” and she herself is reading “Ivanhoe, one of the
Waverley novels.”

There is no proof, however, that any part of her Utopia was sketched
after this tour, and a great part of it was certainly written before.

On the whole, perhaps, the most remarkable thing in connection with
“Sackermena and her Isles” is the staying power shown by the writer in
developing her idea, and her determination to get everything down on
paper. In this more than in anything else the child was father of the
man.

S. J.-B. was a born chronicler.

As regards Sackermena, the idea certainly afforded no lack of scope and
variety. What with drawing maps, writing poetry, framing laws, adding up
the totals of her army and reserves, devising for the soldiery “A dark
red long coat with silver falcons, and thick leather buskins studden
with iron,” and many another guise equally picturesque,—she certainly
did not suffer from monotony in her self-chosen occupation. And the
above examples by no means exhaust its possibilities. On a stray slip of
paper we come upon a formal complaint from a “justice,” who, “passing in
disguise through Pe,” was supplied with a loaf deficient in weight; and
a tiny booklet (laboriously stitched together by the writer’s hot little
hands) has the following title page:

                           THE SACKERMENEE’S
                              POCKET BOOK

                               ----------

                    _Containing many Little Accounts
                           of their Customs_

                               ----------

                     PUBLISHED BY S. L. BLAKE & CO.
                             Hastings 1848

                                                             _Jan. 1850_

The two dates seem to indicate that _Sackermena_ flourished for perhaps
two years; but the Pocket Book itself was not a hardy plant. The big
foolscap sheets were clearly more stimulating to the imagination.

The thing is child’s work throughout. From first to last it bears no
trace of grown-up criticism; nor is there then or afterwards any note by
her parents, teachers or friends, referring in even the most distant way
to the faerie region in which the little girl must have spent so much of
her time.

Another thing strikes one incidentally—considering the atmosphere in
which the child was brought up—as rather curious. There is no mention of
clergy at Sackermena, nor of any form of church. We are not even told
that nothing of the kind existed.

Note again that the Despotic Emperor was the grand Lawgiver, General,
Judge, Sage, Physician, and, in short, the Father, of his vast
dominions.




                               CHAPTER II
                              SCHOOL LIFE


“You often say how happy you were as a child,” an intimate friend
remarked once to Dr. Jex-Blake, “but you never talk of your school life.
I expect you were a terrible pickle?”

“Specs so,” was the laconic response, and the subject dropped.

There is no getting round the fact that she _was_ a terrible pickle. If
we bear in mind what the state of girls’ education was in those days we
shall see that it could scarcely have been otherwise. If she could have
gone to a boys’ school and enjoyed its boisterous give and take, the
little “despotic emperor” would soon have found her level. One loves to
think how happy she would have been in the modern Girls’ High School: if
she had but found the education of women in the condition in which she
left it, the difference in her whole future would have been very great,
but women of the present day would not owe her the debt they owe her
now. “The breaker is gone up before them.”

As things were, she had, in a sense, got the upper hand of her parents
before she went to school at all. She was simply overflowing with energy
and vitality, and they found themselves, while she was little more than
a child, confronted with a personality which ran right athwart their
preconceived notions and theories of life. They had not the right
weapons with which to meet the outbursts of her volcanic temperament,
and it must always be borne in mind that “when she was good, she was
very very good,” immeasurably more attractive than the average child.

The one effort of her teachers, of course, was to repress her, to induce
her to be “ladylike,” and, most unfortunately of all, to make every
childish act of disobedience, every outburst of passion, the text for a
homily on the necessity of “coming to Jesus.” One cannot read the long
series of letters referred to above without wondering how it came about
that the germ of religion in the child’s heart was not worn away
altogether; and indeed its survival only becomes comprehensible when one
bears in mind the genuine goodness of many of those who watched over
her, and also the “unknown quantity,”—that elusive unsearchable factor
that is present in every human equation.

The earliest references to her education are two letters from her first
governess, Miss B., to Mrs. Jex-Blake, of which the first is dated
November 24th, 1848:

  “Sophy is a dear child, shewing daily advancement in her studies, and
  often delighting me by a rectitude of principle emanating, I trust
  ‘from the Father of lights’. A little native wildness (and that
  gradually softening down) together with the want of promptitude in
  setting about her duties, are the chief obstacles that could be picked
  out from a much longer list of things most prized by an earnest
  teacher. I have often thought of your wish that she should learn the
  Latin grammar, and quite agree with your view of its probable
  advantage; but I am afraid of breaking down in the long and short
  syllables.... For the next few months it appears to me nothing will be
  lost by our present system, in which I find parsing to be generally a
  subject of interest.

  I trust the time is not very distant when your little girl will
  successfully strive to be both a help and comfort to her parents.”

The second letter is nearly two months later:

  “Your kind letter with its agreeable suggestion reached me too late
  for a reply by return of post. It would have given me a feeling deeper
  than pleasure to continue the instruction of your very promising
  child, but I have already engaged with one daily pupil and have a half
  prospect of another, in addition to which God’s high dispensation
  seems to allot to my keeping, as soon as He graciously gives me the
  means, the eldest of four children belonging to my Brother.... With
  our best love to Sophy, I am, dear Mrs. Blake,

                                   Yours in the Lord,
                                                            MARY B.”

The first arrangement having fallen through, Sophy was sent with her
sister to Belmont, a school kept by Mrs. and Miss Teed. The following
letter seems to have been written on the day they set out:

                                               “29th January [1849].

  DEAR LITTLE SO,

        I hope you had a comfortable journey; I fear the cold wind must
  have increased your cold. Now, dearest child, you must be always going
  to Jesus for grace to overcome self-will and the desire to be
  conspicuous. Strive to be a gentle child, in reality esteeming others
  better than yourself. You cannot learn anything to any purpose till
  you are obedient and have some self-command. Try to be a comfort to
  dearest Carry, she has her trials, depend upon it,—do you be obedient
  to her and thoughtful of her comfort, without making a fuss about it.
  Carry likes kindness quietly done. Do not give needless trouble to
  Miss Towers or anyone. Try to deserve Dearest Mrs. Teed’s good
  opinion. Jesus will be sure to help you whenever you ask Him. I
  forward a note that arrived from Aunt Taylor. Papa sends best love.

                       I am your affectionate Mother,
                                             MARIA EMILY JEX-BLAKE.”

Mrs. Jex-Blake’s health never was robust, and at this time it was
causing her husband and intimate friends some uneasiness.

  “Do you know, darling Sophy,” she writes on March 27th, “it is
  sometimes quite a trial to me to write _one_ letter to each of you,
  and I should hardly do it, did I not know how ‘nice it is’ (as you
  say) to hear from home at school. I so much like you to send me the
  heads of Mr. Parker’s and of Mr. Taylor’s sermons. The one on 23 Jer.
  29 must have been very beautiful.... Papa has just come in and says
  thank dear little _So_ for her letter and tell her I am _particularly_
  pleased with the clear way in which she sent me the heads of the
  sermon.... I send you a few of our violets.”

And again,

  “Be much in prayer, my sweet one, for grace to be obedient and gentle.
  Hope whispers great things for our next meeting if God grants us one.

  I am comforting myself with the hope that you are waging constant war
  against _self-will_ and _disobedience_. You can hardly believe how
  happy you will be when through God’s help upon your earnest
  endeavours, you can obey _at once_ and give up your own way. I send my
  darling child a text which I wish her to learn and pray for grace to
  live up to. It is 1 Peter v. 5. I wish you to learn it perfectly and
  make it part of your _daily_ prayers. Tell me when you write that you
  have done so. Bear it in mind all day long, and try hard, very hard,
  to live up to it. I often fancy you all at morning prayers and wish I
  could be there.[4] God gives you great privileges, dear child, that
  you may live to Him.”

Footnote 4:

  She would probably not have elected to be there on the morning when
  some imp induced Sophy to tip over a bench on to the row of girls
  kneeling in front of her.

All the letters are in this vein, and all were read by the recipient
many times and carefully preserved.

In June, 1849, she went with her parents, brother and sister to spend a
long holiday in the Lake District, and one is glad to think of her as
being much in the open air, collecting plants and stones, “shooting a
good deal with bow and arrows,” riding on the coach, and being allowed
to drive for a few minutes herself.[5]

Footnote 5:

  She used to say that her intimate familiarity with the details of
  harnessing and all stable matters was due to the fact that when they
  were spending a holiday in the country her father allowed them to have
  a pony and trap on condition that, with the exception of actual
  grooming, the children managed it entirely themselves.

Her holiday diary is as well written and as dull as that of the average
adult, and one is almost startled when one comes upon such entries as
“Played at horses and pretended I was driving the mail”; and again, “A
very wet day. I had a very nice game with Papa and Carry, and another
with Carry in the afternoon and afterwards another alone with Papa very
nice indeed and I enjoyed it _very_ much.”

On the other hand there was no lack of church-going, and the texts are
always carefully noted down:

  “July 29th Sunday. Went to Keswick church in the morning and the text
  was James 4. 8. Brother went to church at Thornthwaite. Papa, Brother
  and Carry walked off to the Vale of St. John’s, but there was no
  sermon—only prayers. Went to Keswick church in the afternoon and the
  clergyman took his text from Ps. 119, 96.”

  “Aug. 5th. Mama was very ill and I stopped at home both in the morning
  and afternoon with her. Papa, Brother and Carry went to Brougham-hall
  to church but there was no service. They went again in the afternoon
  to Brougham-hall—no sermon. I went in the evening to Penrith church
  and the text was Luke 16. 8.”

_She_ never seems to have drawn a blank, poor little soul!

A previous entry is even more characteristic of the world she lived in:

  “July 23rd.... Had a walk with Papa and Carry in the afternoon, and
  afterwards bought tracts (for 6d.) with Carry.”

  “24th. A rather wet morning. Went out with Papa and gave away some
  tracts.”

Yet her Father was an excellent playfellow and at this time her most
indulgent critic. In the spring of 1850 he writes—“It is a real pleasure
to me to hear from you, and I hear such pleasing accounts of you from
others that I am very glad”; but it must be admitted that this note of
congratulation is rare.

There is an amusing little joint note from her parents, probably of an
earlier date:

  “DEAR SOPHY,

        I send you the 1s. and I hope the yellow paper. I do not know
  what you want of paste-board, therefore I fear I cannot send it. I
  send the gingerbreads, and hope to do so on the 11th again. Your
  affectionate Mother.”

Then follows in pencil:

  “Dear child, I have got _all_ the things for you and leave them with 2
  pounds of gingerbread. I think you want more than one shilling for
  your purpose so I enclose 2s. for you.

                                           Your affect. Papa,
                                                           T. J.-B.”

But it must not be supposed that her parents were ever otherwise than of
one mind concerning her. Like all well-constituted husbands, Mr. Jex-
Blake was quite prepared on occasion to demolish the child who made his
wife uncomfortable. And it must be confessed that little Sophy had
rather a knack of making people “uncomfortable.” She was so keen about
everything: she staked her equanimity so often on things which it might
have been wiser to regard as trifles, that those about her learned to
live in a state of some anxiety, never knowing when the eruption might
come.

The remedy for it all is painfully obvious as we read. More scope, more
physical exercise, more fresh air; but, as already pointed out, the
girls’ schools of those days provided none of these things; and, when
the child came to her dearly loved home, the Mother’s excessive
fragility made it necessary that her daughter should live the life of a
grown up person.[6] The most devoted mutual love could not devise a
_régime_ suited to both. The lovely ailing Mother could not stand noise
and excitement. Sophy was often riotous, excitable, “rough” yet always
very loving with it all. On one occasion when walking demurely along the
pavement in a _queue_ of well-behaved girls, she caught sight of her
father, and, without a moment’s hesitation, deserted the ranks, and took
a flying leap on to his back!

Footnote 6:

  “I must tell you my experience,” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake to Dr. Lucy
  Sewall a quarter of a century later, “_not_ my own practice, it was
  not the fashion of my day (and having lost my three eldest I was very
  anxious and fidgetty):—Where children are trusted and have a good deal
  of independence, and their tempers not fretted about _little_ things,
  they grow up more open, confiding and trustworthy.”

No wonder that a contemporary friend of the family describes him as
saying very often, “My dear Sophy! My dear child!” in tones of absolute
bewilderment.

In the summer of 1850 Sophy made the tour referred to in the preceding
chapter, and a liberal education it must have been. In April Mrs. Jex-
Blake had written,

  “I hardly allow myself to look forward to the treat of going to
  Scotland; it seems almost too much pleasure,—and we shall be sure to
  find people who love Jesus and love the Bible there and that will add
  so very greatly to our pleasure.... Papa thanks you for your letter,
  he is surprised and pleased to learn that you are in Reduction.... Use
  daily as a prayer the substance of 1 Peter v. 5.”

“18th June. Left Belmont at 20 minutes to 10 with Miss Teed, and met
Papa and Mama at the Euston, and went to Rugby to pick up Brother.” So
Sophy’s own diary begins, and an excellent conscientious piece of work
it is. They visited Leamington, Warwick, Kenilworth: thence to
Edinburgh, Stirling, Glasgow and the Lochs, Callander and the Trossachs,
stopping at York on the way south.

A pretty piece of doggerel shows the happy relations between Father and
daughter at this period. It is scribbled in pencil on the back of a
hotel-keeper’s note. The Father begins in his scholarly handwriting:

                “My little child, You’re very wild,
                Could you be still, And yet not ill,
                Then, little So, This I do know,
                You’d be a blessing, Worth possessing.”

Whereupon Sophy comes hobbling on:

                   “My dear Father, I had rather
                   You’d believe me, And relieve me,
                   When I say, As I may,
                   That I’ll be good, As I should.”

Of course it is she who recommences the game:

                “My dear Papa, Aha, Aha,
                Send me a letter, Then you can better
                Tell when we go, Off to Tarbet Oh!
                And all your wishes, With many kisses.”

And the scholarly handwriting closes the page:

                  “I kiss you! Why if I do
                  I kiss a wild, And teasing child.
                  But this short note, Papa has wrote
                  To say at ten, We start again.
                  Henceforth you should Be very good.”

In autumn the two sisters returned to Mrs. Teed’s school, and things
resumed their chequered course. I am told by a schoolfellow of Sophy’s,
who had an excellent influence over her at that time, that Mrs. Teed
managed the little girl extremely well: and in any case she remained at
Belmont for two years, when Mrs. Jex-Blake removed her—evidently to the
child’s regret—on the curious ground that she was being “extinguished.”
The truth is that the younger pupils were rationed according to age,
and, as Sophy was physically as well as mentally in advance of her
contemporaries, she was reduced to eating raw acorns to appease her
hunger. But Mrs. Jex-Blake was not aware of that detail till long after.

In the meantime, the former teacher, Miss B., had settled at Ramsgate
with the pupils already referred to, and Sophy was sent back to her. A
more devoted and conscientious teacher one can scarcely imagine, but the
arrangement was in some ways a very unfortunate one. At home—and
probably also to some extent at Mrs. Teed’s—the religious atmosphere was
tempered by a sense of humour as regards the ordinary affairs of life;
but of this quality worthy Miss B. seems to have possessed no trace.
Henceforth the child lived in a religious forcing house. One hopes that
at times she escaped to Sweet Sackermena and her Isles, but the moral
atmosphere at Ramsgate was not conducive to such pagan wanderings. Her
brain was pronounced excitable, and she was to have but little head
employment, but she was taken to church several times a week, and
encouraged—or instructed—to write out the sermons to send home to her
parents. Here is an example of her work: (Miss B.’s trifling corrections
are omitted.)

               “Mr. Dunbrain. John iii. 3.*  April 2. 1851.

  We live in days of deep interest,—the common topics of men are thrown
  aside and everyone seems to be utterly absorbed in religious
  controversies. The torpor which had overspread the church has entirely
  dissolved, and now all around we hear nothing but the perpetual strife
  jar and clamour of religious disputes. It is a storm and a strong one
  too, but many think it precedes the blessed peace and quiet of the
  Millennium. Like every storm it did not come all at once, but it has
  been long in gathering; it began with what men call trifles and rose
  gradually, gathering strength as it rose, etc., etc.

             Those marked * are Wednesday evening lectures.”

We are left to guess whether she wrote out the lecture after supper the
night it was delivered, or lay awake “remembering it” till next morning.

Memory altogether was a faculty assiduously cultivated. It was the
custom for the family to gather round the fire on Sunday evenings, and
for one after the other to repeat a sacred poem. When they had been
separated for a time, special interest attached to the items each had
added in the interval to his, or her, repertory. No doubt the custom
began with the learning of hymns, but they seem for the most part to
have been good hymns, and round this nucleus there gathered an
extraordinarily varied collection,—fine passages from Isaiah and the
Psalms, poems by Trench, Dean Alford, Longfellow, Wordsworth and many
more. It was said of the younger daughter in her later life that, if she
had been shipwrecked on a desert island with nothing but pens and paper
in addition to the actual means of livelihood, she could gradually have
provided a priceless library from memory alone.

A few of her letters at this time have been preserved.

                                                             [1851].

  “DEAR DADDY,

        A most extraordinary thing happened this morning; the crew of a
  Portuguese ship put up in the masthead figures representing Pontius
  Pilate and Judas and exactly as 10 struck on the pier clock they
  thumped them down into the sea! Now was not this Popish trash? A
  respectable English jolly tar told Miss B. all about it and added how
  happy we were to be taught better; now I think that’s a right good
  English spirit. The first grand steamer has just come in. I have a
  very bad cold and have not been out. Miss B. brought me some licorice
  for my cough and I am to have treacle posset tonight so I could not
  possibly be taken more care of and no doubt it will be quite well
  before 30th. You musn’t think Miss B. had _anything_ to do with my
  talking about tractarianism, indeed afterwards she forbade it,—it was
  all my fault. I’m writing a history of our family entitled ‘History of
  the illustrious family of Blakes from 70 B.C. to 1080 A.D.’ Dear Daddy
  how I _do_ love you, if I could ‘climb those knees and kiss that face’
  I’d be happy enough, indeed I’m very happy here but home sweet home is
  better than anything else. S. B.

  Do send me a _large_ seal of your crest.”

Her Mother, however, is always her main confidant.

  “I’m in a scrape just now Mama,” she writes on April 5th, 1851, “I
  long to be at Home, home sweet home there’s no place like home, no
  person like Mummy and no kiss like Mummy’s cuddle and no knees like
  Papa’s and no player at Prisoner and Judge Selling or any other game
  in the world like Papa, no one that can put me in a good humour like
  Daddy and Mummy! Oh! nothing like what everything is at home
  _anywhere_ else, in all Europe Asia Africa and America no place is
  like home, sweet sweet home.... Love to dear Papa and yourself 3000000
  kisses. I always kiss the envelope. Please write very soon. I am your
  affectionate and I _hope_ dutiful Sophy.”

We know how fervently the Mother “_hoped_” the same!

The child seems to have spent the first weeks of May in her beloved
home, and the following letter from Miss B. gives us a graphic sketch of
her return to school:

  “MY DEAR MRS. BLAKE,

        Dearest Sophy has laid her letter before me, and such a burden
  of grief I can scarcely bear to send—but you will look at my view of
  the picture likewise. The tears shed in writing that were very nearly
  all we have had; for soon after parting from her Papa the heavy clouds
  passed away, and, when established in the fly I was glad to hear,
  ‘Well, I am not quite so sorry as I expected to be,’ and then ‘Mummy
  says the air of Ramsgate will almost make amends for the parting.’ We
  got home and found dinner ready, but dear Sophy could only take a
  little rhubarb.... At tea she seemed surprised at being able to
  express herself as ‘hungry,’ though the appetite was soon satisfied,
  and she is now sitting reading in the garden, which she says is
  ‘delicious’. Dear Mrs. Blake do not think I will tax her head with
  anything beyond beneficial employment. It will be my study to get rid
  of that _thin look_ which I could scarcely have attributed to so short
  a change (!). I ought to tell you that Sophy meant to say that she
  felt better when she got into Ramsgate than for some time, but grief
  swallowed up all other news.”

A week or two later her Father asks her in a rash moment if she can tell
him “Why it is wrong to oppose Papal Aggression?” adding, “If you can’t,
I will tell you.” The question was a mere conundrum, but she takes it
very seriously:

  “DEAR FATHER,

  I am _very very_ sorry to hear that dearest Mother is so unwell (or I
  should say _ill_). I send her a marker as _I_ have not many flowers
  that will press well.[7] Please tell her that she must not give it
  away to anyone. I am quite enchanted at Boy’s getting _two_ poetry
  prizes; it is charming.

  Well, about the question, ‘Why it is _wrong_ to oppose the Papal
  Aggression?’ I really don’t see how it _can_ be wrong and must think
  it quite right. I can’t see how it can be wrong for any zealous
  servant of God to oppose with _all_ his might that which dishonours
  God and his word, which (when the Bible says ‘none _can_ come unto the
  Father but by _Me_’) says that we _must_ come by the Virgin and the
  saints etc. People might say ‘We must not oppose it for it is God’s
  will’ they might also say that ‘temptation was put before the Jews and
  _that_ was God’s will’ but they were told to put the accursed thing
  far from them and destroy it utterly and _I_ think the Papal
  Aggression is put in _our_ way to try us and see if we _will_ oppose
  it unto death. But of course you know more about it than I, so please
  tell me why it is wrong to oppose it.”

Footnote 7:

  She had her own little garden at Ramsgate.

One can imagine that her Father was almost ashamed to confess that the
question was only a joke.

  “Now for a word about the ‘bowing,’” he says in another letter. “It is
  of _no_ importance in itself, and therefore I never tell my children
  or servants either to bow or not to bow; but particular circumstances
  may render it important, and if good and kind Miss B. thinks that at
  Christ Church, you may honour God rather by doing as she and others
  who are with her do, than by being singular on this point, I not only
  wish you to obey her, but to do it with a willing and ready mind,
  cheerfully, as a plain matter of duty. Which it is. It is for her to
  judge, and for you to do, _gladly_, what she tells you.”

Miss B. had the greatest admiration for her pupil’s gifts, and in
particular she considered her a budding poetess. These are some of the
effusions of the period:

               “Oh Mother! thou that broughtest me forth
               My sins gainst thee none, none can tell
               For these alone I ought in sooth
               To be e’en now in lowest hell.
               But oh! my God still spares me on
               To be a comfort to thy years
               God grant I may e’er the sun goes down
               Seal thee this promise with my tears.
               Ne’er ne’er again what [e’er] betide,
               (In Jesu’s strength alone I trust)
               I’ll vex my mother, who did guide
               My years of infancy now past.”

Another time after expatiating on her Mother’s virtues and unmerited
affection, she goes on to inform her that there is One—

                “Whose love surpasseth thine as far
                As Sol excels the falling star.
                My Mother ONE request I make
                That thou wouldst pray for Jesu’s sake
                That he would break this heart of stone
                And mould it like my Saviour’s own.”

Was it all mere humbug and “patter”? The question can best be answered
by quoting the following letter to her Father. It is written impulsively
in pencil on scraps of paper,—the questions and answers being on
different slips. The wording of the questions has sometimes been altered
and corrected, so presumably she drafted them herself. The little sheaf
has been thrust “anyhow” into an envelope (addressed to _Mrs_. T. Jex-
Blake) which bears postmark “Ramsgate, Ap. 21. 1851,” and Mrs. Jex-Blake
has quaintly endorsed it “very nice.”

  “MY DEAREST FATHER,

        I fear you are very uneasy about me for I have indeed manifested
  no visible proof of a new and clean heart, but I think much of my soul
  too much for me to speak even to you of it. But I cannot _talk_ so
  whenever anyone tries to talk to me of it I always turn it into jest
  but I must write (I cannot speak) to you about it so I have written
  some questions down and endeavoured to answer them as _before God_. So
  do believe _each word_.

                                                               S. B.

  1. If you died this instant what would become of you? And could you
  face death unflinchingly?

    I know not what would become of me but I fear I should go to eternal
    torments. And do not think I could face death unflinchingly for this
    reason.

  2. What would be your first emotion when you found yourself in the
  presence of the Judge of quick and dead?

    Fear I think but yet I think that I should claim Jesus’ promises to
    lost sinners.

  3. If Christ came this night and asked you ‘Lovest thou me’ what would
  be your answer?

    Yes Lord although I am very wicked and cold and dull yet I could say
    without hesitation I do love thee very much I often feel my heart
    warm towards thee and something tells me that one day I shall love
    thee far better than I do now.

  4. Could you before God say truly ‘I strive to live as I hope to die’?

    No I fear I could not although sometimes I do try to do things to
    please Jesus.

  5. Do you really in your heart know your religion to be a mere form or
  do you really feel its life-giving influence on your heart?

    I know I often say far more than I really believe, I even have been
    tempted so far as to doubt in my heart the existence of a Diety but
    yet I have had a few bright moments in which I could sincerely say
    Yes I _know_ it I know that Christ is mine and I am his but a deep
    gloom is generally over my spirit.

  6. Do you in your heart believe yourself to be a new creature?

    I know not but I fear not although at times I have been fully
    convinced that I am God’s child.

  7. Do you earnestly desire to be such?

    Most earnestly whenever anything touches that chord in my heart and
    sometimes I could weep bitterly but generally I feel awfully
    indifferent as to my soul.

  8. Do you think you have ever known what true prayer is?

    Most certainly and have sometimes obtained very gracious answers.

  9. Where will you be 200 years hence?

    In heaven I humbly hope and trust for I think the Lord has _begun_ a
    good work in me.”

Gallant honest heart!

Is there a single word in the whole confession that the most devoted
parent would have wished different?




                              CHAPTER III
                        SCHOOL LIFE—_Continued_


“I think the Lord has _begun_ a good work in me.” Is there in the words
a—very human and pardonable—suggestion of St. Augustine’s “_Timebam enim
ne me cito exaudires_”? In any case, though doubtless the good work went
on, it cannot be denied that the tares flourished abundantly with the
wheat.

It happened most unfortunately at this time that the child’s physical
health fell into a very unsatisfactory state: we hear of great digestive
trouble and functional weakness of the joints. Modern hygiene would
probably have made short work of both complaints. As things were, the
weakness was “tinkered at,” and the child was encouraged to live the
life of an invalid. We are startled to learn incidentally that she is
going out in a bath chair!

Good Miss B. took her up to town to see a consultant, and sent the
parents long detailed reports on the child’s health. We are not
surprised to come upon the following under date July, 1851:

  “You must not suppose, dear Mrs. Blake, that I overlook the _self_
  that you have rightly so much at heart. I see it too well, and it is
  commented on to Sophy so frequently that I sometimes check myself, ...
  but the punishment that I might inflict on another I hold back in
  Sophy’s case, not only from my own knowledge of her character, but
  because Mr. S. cautioned me if possible never to disturb the even
  tenor of her brain.... Her case is peculiar and such must be the ends
  to meet it: they will require patience and may be long in showing
  fruit, but we will not despair.”

The next vacation seems to have been disastrous. The child had grown
more indolent and self-centred, and no doubt the parents were unable to
deny her the sweetmeats which she loved and which the supposed weakness
of her joints made it impossible for her to “work off” as healthy
children should. Moreover, few houses are large enough to contain two
chronic invalids.

  “I received your letter,” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake when the child is
  gone, “and very glad we were to hear of your safe arrival,—but, my own
  child, I could have cried over your words. They were nice and
  affectionate, _but the very opposite of your acts_.... Either my child
  means what she writes or she does not. Your conduct completely
  contradicts your assertions. More sad and foolish behaviour than yours
  it is difficult to imagine. You behaved so ill that I doubt if I could
  have borne it another day without being laid on a bed of sickness, and
  I might never have recovered. Your ever being with us again for three
  weeks at a time is _quite out of the question_ till you have the good
  sense to understand (as other children of your age do) that to be
  happy and comfortable and to enable me in my weak state to have you at
  all, you must be _good_. When you seem really to feel how ill you have
  behaved, we will some time hence have you home for a week, and if I
  find you keep your word (which you do not now) we will have you home
  very often; and Papa says that he shall then think that he can never
  do enough to make you very very happy; but you now destroy your
  happiness and my health, and the medical men will _not allow_ us to be
  together. Think of your great folly and sin, my dear child. Pray to
  God for grace, and He will give it to you for His dear Son’s sake....

  When you have read this letter, I _wish_ you to tear it up.”

As ill luck would have it, this most unusually severe indictment found
the poor little culprit seriously ill in bed. Her penitent reply is not
forthcoming, but five days later, her Mother writes again:

  “MY OWN DARLING CHILD,

        I trust this will find you much better; if you want me to be
  happy you must make all possible haste to get well, and write to tell
  me you are well.... I quite believe, my darling, that you are sorry,
  and will, in God’s strength, take pains that the same shall never
  happen again. I do particularly wish you to tear up my last letter _at
  once_.”

She didn’t tear it up: she never could tear up “Mummy’s letters.” She
tied the two together with a piece of red wool, and slipped in with them
a Sunday School “ticket” bearing the words, “Children, obey your parents
in the Lord; for this is right.”

By the same post as the second of these letters her Father writes:

  “MY DARLING CHILD,

  We have been so grieved to hear of your illness, and do hope that
  before you receive this, you will be much better. It will please you
  to know that dear Mummy _is_ much better for the quiet and Norfolk
  air. Everybody is so kind and trying to get her quite strong, and they
  all enquire so kindly after little Sophy, whom they call ‘little
  Sophy’ still, everybody saying what a very sweet and darling child you
  were six years ago; and I do trust that, when you see them next, they
  will find you a more darling child, and more loveable than ever. God
  grant it be so, dearest, for I want you to be _very_ happy.”

The next letter from Miss B. that has been preserved is dated September,
1851, and is addressed to Mr. Jex-Blake. “I ought not to express sorrow
at the sudden removal of your child, hoping and believing that it is
‘ordered by the Lord.’ She bears away with her my affectionate love and
prayerful interest.”

No record has been kept of the precise steps that led to the “sudden
removal.”

For the next two years the child went to a boarding-school in Brighton,
where her parents had now gone to reside, and there are, therefore,
practically no letters of the period. Two of her schoolfellows, however,
have been good enough to contribute their impressions of her. For better
and for worse, they call up a very vivid picture. Miss Lucy Portal
writes:

  “Being the junior of Sophy, as we always called her, she and I were
  not much in touch, though I never forgot her, for she had a strong
  personality, and was so clever—in fact, far above our school-mistress
  in natural intelligence, and she made a lasting impression on those
  with whom she associated. Whenever I heard her name in after life the
  vision of a young capable girl who asked questions that bewildered her
  governess rose before me.

  One day when we were walking on the ‘Downs’ with [an assistant
  governess] in the rear, Sophy saw a large stone by the wayside and
  seated herself on it. ‘What do you mean by this?’ said the governess.
  ‘I am tired and must rest,’ replied Sophy. ‘Get up at once,’ said Miss
  ——; ‘Do you suppose we are all going to wait your pleasure in this
  way?’ ‘Impossible to do what is beyond one’s capacity,’ was the
  rejoinder, and threats had no effect. At last Miss —— lost her temper
  and said ‘Sophy, distinctly understand that if you do not get up, I
  shall leave you here, and send a policeman to fetch you.’ ‘Ah,’ said
  Sophy, ‘that is a kind thought. I am sure he would prove of great
  assistance to me. But could you manage to procure _two_ policemen, for
  I don’t believe one would be able to carry me, and two might do so.’ I
  need not say that the battle of words was soon over after that.”

Knowing as one does how anomalous was the position of an assistant
teacher in those days, one can but admit that the child must often have
inflicted far greater suffering and anxiety than she had the least idea
of.

On the other hand, Mrs. Gover, widow of the late Canon Gover of
Worcester, writes:

  “Sophie set us a good example at school, and I shall always think of
  her as one of the most truthful girls I have ever known, the _only_
  girl I ever knew who would not allow her drawings to be touched up by
  her master. I had a very great respect for her high character.”

But nothing can show more clearly the futility of the educational
methods of that day than the following letter from the headmistress
herself:

                                                        “June, 1852.

  DEAREST SOPHY,

  I cannot tell you with what a feeling of anguish I heard the door
  close after you on Saturday when you departed, and I had not _kissed_
  or _blessed_ you.... I saw you afterwards in the street, tho’ I was
  unseen by you, and I could not stop you, my dear child, lest the past
  should be renewed. On my return I saw your present of fruit, it was
  not as gratifying to me as the _scrap_ of paper, which contained my
  Sophy’s acknowledgement of her fault.[8] Yet I thank you for the kind
  thought, as I hope you know me too well to suppose that any little
  gift _can bribe me_ to forgive;—without that scrap, my Sophy, I should
  have turned away from _receiving_ your fruit. The same afternoon at a
  friend’s house I read a portion of your favourite Scott, and could not
  but think of you while I read the account of the ‘evil and good’
  _trying_ for _Mastery_ in Harold the Dauntless’ heart, remember his
  first act of _forbearance_ was noted as a step towards heaven. Beloved
  child! do I beseech you remember the _duty_ of a child, be _gentle_
  and _tender_ to your dear Parents, then the Lord will love you, and
  some day the Lion will give place to the Lamb in your bosom. Dear Mary
  Bayly’s has turned to whooping-cough. I hope yours is better. Until I
  find where to send her, I cannot leave home. God’s will be done.”

Footnote 8:

  Her brother had called at the school, immaculately dressed, and had
  behaved to the schoolmistress so charmingly that poor Sophy felt
  herself quite left out in the cold, and had doubtless responded with
  positive rudeness. What sort of visit was this from a beloved brother?

For a year and a half Sophy remained under this lady’s care, and then
one or two equally unsuccessful experiments were made. Meanwhile Mrs.
Jex-Blake remained so ailing that it was not possible for her to have
the child at home for the long vacation, and a “dear kind” lady invites
the refractory young person to visit her for part of the time. Mr. Jex-
Blake writes to inform Sophy of the fact, and adds, “Now have we not in
this great cause of thankfulness to our kind God and Father who never
forgets us?” This was perhaps asking a little too much of the homesick
child.

The truth is that the parents at this time were not growing younger (as
many parents do), and certainly they were growing more staid and set in
their ways. It was becoming increasingly difficult to them to adapt
themselves to this riotous child. “Avoid excitement which is your great
enemy,” writes her Father, unaware perhaps that his own weakness was a
tendency to be rather too fussy and precise. With hearts full of love
they were demanding of her a standard of excellence which for her was
wholly artificial, and in the half-hearted, or at least intermittent,
effort to attain it, she fell in the breach. And parents and child were
not the only factors in the difficult problem of home life. So long as
Sophy could by any stretch of charity be reckoned a child, it was
comparatively easy for her brother and sister to put up with her
volcanic ways. But from a schoolgirl one expects some conformity to
recognized standards, and Sophy’s elder sister had been such a pattern
in this respect that the contrast was necessarily acute.

“I really don’t think you would enjoy [a visit from] Carry much at
school even if we could spare her,” Mrs. Jex-Blake writes in reply to an
eager request for this privilege. “You would be tempted to be odd and
excitable, and then Carry would be _vexed_ and all would be
uncomfortable” and no one who knew the elder sister can doubt that such
demonstrations of affection would probably have “vexed” her more than
most. On the other hand “Brother” was now a young man, and if his main
desire for the child was that she should grow up like the sisters of
other men, he only shared the attitude common at that time to the
overwhelming majority of his sex. One can see that his younger sister
must have tried him a good deal. The idea that she was plain and even
ugly had been firmly impressed upon her: the exhibition of vanity in
matters of dress had been discouraged on every ground: and it was
natural to her boyish temperament to be careless of such things. When,
in addition to these shortcomings, she added a propensity for making
people “uncomfortable,” one can quite understand that her brother did
not feel specially proud of her, and the strength of her character
probably made it difficult for him to influence her through the
passionate affection and admiration she had cherished for him all
through her childhood. In any case the relation between them became
somewhat strained, and it is not surprising if she sometimes attributed
the strictures of her parents to his influence and representations.

It is delightful to record that, in spite of countless differences of
opinion and much plain speaking on both sides, a fine loyal camaraderie
existed between the sisters throughout life.

I don’t know whether it ever occurred to the child to compare her
brother’s education with her own. If she had done so, the reflection
might well have made her bitter. In athletics as in the schools he was
bearing off laurels at every turn, while she was being curbed and
thwarted to meet the requirements of pious and half-educated
schoolmistresses. From the best of motives her parents refused for her
the outlet for the “excitability” they constantly deprecated; in other
words they simply sat on the safety valve. In the summer of 1854 she
begged—probably not for the first time—to be allowed to have riding
lessons. The father replied

  “I like to do anything in reason to please my own child, but you are
  so very excitable and have at present so lamentably little self-
  command that I should fear riding for you very much. It would do you
  no good and might be injurious to you in many ways. When will you
  prove to me that my hopes and expectations of you are not in vain?...
  You don’t know how the hearing you censured goes to my heart, and the
  not being able to place the most unbounded confidence in you is very
  trying to me and the dear Mother,—doubly so to her in her weak state.”

Of course it is easy now to see that he was wrong as regards the riding.
Apart altogether from the physical exercise involved, the discipline of
it would have been excellent. Big emergencies always braced her. She
never lost her temper with a horse, nor her presence of mind in an
accident.

Meanwhile the series of loving reproachful letters goes steadily on.

  “Do you think, darling,” her Father writes, “that by divine grace you
  are less self-willed day by day? How earnestly do I desire to see you
  a loving happy child. Everybody seems to deprecate your presence as
  that which will spread discomfort all around.... God bless you and
  help you and give you His Holy Spirit to guide you continually.”

“Everybody” was an overstatement. At no time was the child without her
own little circle of admiring friends. A schoolfellow with whom she
remained on terms of intimate friendship throughout life says,—“At our
house she was always good and happy, and a very welcome guest. My father
thought very highly of her.”

A fortnight later Mrs. Jex-Blake writes:

  “I rejoice at the nice accounts I have of you from school, and I hope
  (against experience) that you will when we see you again, be a
  pleasant child, the comfort you might so easily be to me.”

“Day and night,” her Father writes, “you are on my heart. You know how I
love you. Why will you thus be your own enemy?”

The faith and perseverance of the parents is astounding: not less so the
fact that at bottom the affection and filial piety of the child never
flagged.

One has to remind oneself constantly—what the daughter never forgot,
though small trace of it appears in the letters of this period—that Mrs.
Jex-Blake had a keen sense of humour. When she and Sophy were together,
they had many a good joke in common. It was when the mesmerism of the
child’s presence was removed that the sense of responsibility asserted
itself in full force. It is impossible to read the long series of
letters without being profoundly convinced,—1. That the parents were
devotedly attached to their youngest child (“Sophy was the favourite,”
was the elder sister’s deliberate comment some sixty years later). 2.
That their affection was returned with an intensity of which few
children are capable. 3. That the warning that she was injuring her
Mother’s health and must therefore be kept away from her dearly-loved
home did not provide a motive strong enough to make the child run in
harness like other people. The inference is that no motive would have
been strong enough.

Did she ever really make an honest effort? One comes upon many
impassioned scraps of prayer for grace to resist temptation. “Oh, that
when a word irritates me I may remember how often I have said more
unkind things and been forgiven.” “Oh, Lord, punish me, reduce me to
submission in any way Thou seest fit, but oh, let me not alone, abandon
me not despite my wickedness.” And, although these prayers are apt to
run into conventional exaggerated language, it is impossible to doubt
their sincerity. Her tiny booklets and papers were always kept with the
strictest secrecy, and it is all but certain that no eye but her own
ever saw them before her death.

Here is an isolated scrap of diary, recording probably a time of special
effort.

  “Feb. 26th, 1854. Oh, keep Thou my foot when I go up into Thy house of
  prayer. O how difficult it is to fix the mind for even that short
  time! Miss X. will treat me unlike any other human being, but that is
  no reason for transgressing the commandment of my God. She says she
  does not like to hear me name the name of Christ for I do not depart
  from iniquity, she thinks I had better not hold conversations on
  sacred subjects.

  A complaint having been made of rudeness from one of the girls, Miss
  X. said it was just like one of Sophy’s tricks, heaven knows with what
  ground. All these things have aggravated me, and I fear I have sadly
  given way to temper and pride, not remembering Him who bare the
  contradiction of sinners against Himself though He never offended in
  word or deed. If sometimes unjustly spoken to, how often have I
  escaped my desert and how few are the faults the strictest find
  compared with an all-seeing God. Oh, for the charity that beareth all
  things....

  27th Monday. I must expect trials this day, humiliating to my pride
  and trying to my temper....

  Nothing special, though I gave way sadly at different times and again
  sinned in sending a letter to Mama [? Maria].

  28th. Again, more and more against light, got sweets. Miss X. in her
  prayer speaks _at_ poor Agnes who is just come. She prays that all may
  be kind to her, remembering the Fatherless and Widow are His special
  care, etc. How could she harrow up poor Agnes’ feelings so! The poor
  child was weeping under the infliction.... And in the prayer she
  announced her intention of expelling anyone who would make the others
  unhappy. O I could have knocked her down, and after prayers she really
  spoke kindly to me about beginning March afresh and any other time I
  could almost have promised to try. As it was I could not kiss her
  even. Oh how much I think of that which might and probably did proceed
  from a pure motive, and do not consider my unkindness often which I
  know does not do so.

  March 1. Whole holiday. Gave way to passion to A. and B. tho’ perhaps
  they were provoking I should better have striven to retain my temper.
  Alas from my feelings since it seems as if it were the letting in of
  water. O preserve me from being so awfully passionate as I was.
  Overbearing and ordering in the afternoon. Oh for the Charity which
  ‘is kind’ which ‘is not puffed up’ ‘seeketh not her own’ and above all
  which ‘is not easily provoked’.”

She had no lack of self-control in other ways: why should she have
failed so conspicuously in this? When all due weight is given to the
reasons already assigned one is still forced to the conclusion that
there was something elemental in her nature over which she not only had
little control, but of which she was to a great extent unconscious. As a
mere child she expresses her thankfulness in a letter to her Mother that
she is less “irritable,” and at rare intervals all through life she
would speak to intimate friends of the intolerable way in which the
blood rushed to her head at times, making it all but impossible for her
to weigh her words. But from first to last she was far less conscious of
the moral aspect of the defect than one would have expected anyone of
her sane judgment and essential humility to be. The severe self-analysis
of the above extracts are on the whole exceptional. From childhood on,
the thought that she had failed those she loved or had caused them
anxiety and suffering, _in a way that she understood_, was a source of
almost intolerable pain and compunction; but she seems to have rarely
and inadequately realized the extent of the suffering she inflicted by
her wilful ways and passionate temper.

“And yet there was always something loveable with it all,” a childhood’s
friend reiterates. “She came bounding into a room, bringing with her an
atmosphere of gaiety and glee that is indescribable.”

Nor are we as regards the judgments of contemporaries confined to the
possibly idealized picture of later years. Fortunately for the accuracy
of the picture, Sophy seems about this time to have originated in the
school a practice of character-writing, in which the critics were
encouraged to be absolutely frank. This is what she brought upon
herself:

  “Sophy is very affectionate and has more good in her than people
  think, she is truthful and can be trusted. She has an immense amount
  of self-conceit, self-sufficiency and pride. She will not be led by
  anything but affection, or a desire to make much of herself, and make
  herself well thought of. She has great talents and is very clever. She
  wishes to be thought an out-of-the-way character and is so. She lacks
  gentleness of feeling and manner.”

  “Sophy is certainly excessively clever but unfortunately knows it, and
  makes a point of showing it off upon every possible occasion. She is
  truthfulness itself and can really be trusted. Very passionate but
  very penitent afterwards. Affectionate.”

  “Clever, passionate, affectionate. Many bad habits but tries (lately
  at least) to get the better of them. Might be made a great deal of.
  Rather too fond of her own opinion. I think true.”

It is rather staggering to find how much wiser the young folks were in
those days than were their elders!

Again Sophy propounds the question whether A. or E. is “the greater
pet.” The discussion goes on in writing, and finally the originator ends
it by saying:

  “At any rate A. is the only friend I have got, and I don’t want to
  lose her.”

To which D. responds:

  “You are wise, but she is not the only friend you _might_ have.”

And Sophy all too proud:

  “There are only one or two others I _could_ have as a friend.”

And finally M.:

  “As to your friends, I quite agree with D. I think you might have had
  many. I know you might have had me long ere this, had you tried.”

Of another schoolfellow under discussion Sophy explains that she finds
the young lady personally “aggravating,” and adds:

  “But I think she is very ingenuous, and would own to a thing, even to
  a little one, which is a great thing considering her pride.

  That is what I do admire so ardently.

                                                             SOPHY.”




                               CHAPTER IV
                        SCHOOL LIFE—_Concluded_


It will surprise no one who has read the extracts from Sophy’s diary on
page 32 to learn that, at the end of the summer term, Miss X. announced
her inability to keep her any longer in the school. The culprit
evidently declined to manifest any proper sense of sin or even of
humiliation; and the distress of her parents may be imagined. They
recognized no other standard by which to judge her than the standard by
which poor Sophy had so egregiously failed.

In any case their kindness never faltered: they could not face having
the child at home, and for some months they did not even see her; but
some “kind ladies” were found to take charge of her until she could be
put temporarily in the care of her old schoolmistress, Mrs. Teed.

Very soon a reassuring report came to relieve the anxious parents. On
July 10th, 1854, Mrs. Jex-Blake writes:

  “I delight to think that my dear child is availing herself of this
  great opportunity of redeeming her character. The past is so sad, so
  disappointing, and the thinking of it is so sure to make me ill, that
  I endeavour with my utmost power to forget it. I will not dwell upon
  it, but look forward to a bright future when my own dear child ...
  will see that determination and self-willedness _can only_ cause
  misery and discomfort to herself, and wellnigh shorten, certainly
  embitter my old age.

  I do feel greatly comforted by Mrs. Teed’s giving a favourable account
  of you. She would like you to be less idle. Why do not you write out
  some papers about your natural philosophy subjects and zoology?”

  “Well, darling,” her Father writes (July 17th), “I was very glad to
  get your letter, though I should like you to write more wisely. I
  don’t at all mind your writing about ‘unkind lectures’ for I _know_ I
  never am and cannot be unkind to my own child; but I do earnestly wish
  that you saw (as others do) how exceedingly foolish your conduct has
  been, and that by nothing but a complete change can you ever be
  comfortable.”

Meanwhile arrangements were being made for the child to go to another
school, and one is thankful to record that it was at least a great
improvement on its predecessors. On July 21st, 1854, Mr. Jex-Blake
writes:

  “We have had a letter from Mrs. H. this morning, and it is now settled
  that G.W. you go to her the beginning of next month and Mrs. T. will
  take you and kindly give you the benefit of her introduction. You will
  go under the most advantageous circumstances possible, and it will be
  solely and _entirely_ your own fault, my darling child, if everybody
  about you does not love you.”

A month later he writes again:

  “MY SWEET CHILD,

        I have just read your letter to the dear Mother.... Your letter
  gives me great pleasure, it is so sensible, and the tone throughout so
  like that of a dear dear child, who will never knowingly again give a
  minute’s pain to the very best of Mothers, that I felt I could not be
  happy without writing to my darling at once to tell her how I look
  forward to her being a real comfort to dearest Mummy, and a constant
  ‘sunbeam’ to me.... I believe the happy feeling of confidence she has
  about you now is doing more for her than all the doctors in the
  world.”

A fortnight later he paid the child a visit, to which she refers in the
following letter:

                                                   “11th Sept. 1854.

  DARLING FATHER,

        You know what immense pleasure I had on Friday. I often think of
  it even now it is past, I feel so glad to have seen you; but Daddy I
  am so sorry about the boat. I cannot forget it and I am very sorry,—
  will you forgive me?

  Do come down tomorrow just to say goodbye. You know you can come down
  by the omnibus you took on Friday and just sit for an hour or so and
  then go back. You can be back by luncheon time or nearly and it would
  be such a pleasure. I cannot get an answer to this by letter but hope
  to secure one by ocular demonstration. I saw Miss B. and gave your
  message, but I fear unless you do as I hope you will that its
  fulfilment will be rather distant. We could just go in the Crescent
  Gardens or even sit still together in the drawing-room for one hour
  (just one) and it would be so enjoyable. I have so many things yet to
  say. You know we had so much walking and eating and shopping to get
  through on Friday that I was not able to tell you half the things I
  had to say.

  If you have arranged for me to come home in 3 weeks time I will try to
  reconcile myself to not seeing you if it is really impossible or
  _very_ inconvenient in joyful hope, but in that case I shall hope for
  a nice long letter (but even then I should not be sorry to see your
  darling face for an hour or so) on Wednesday. If not (but I hope no
  ‘not’ will be in the question) I think you will yourself think that
  considering that I have not seen you since about Jan. 26th, except for
  3½ hours and should not see you till Christmas that really one hour
  would not be lost on your youngest little one. I am hourly
  experiencing the comfort of your last visit (I am now writing with
  some of the paper and a pen of your gift) and your face was like a
  sunbeam in the way. I want to feel your rough cheek once more, though
  I hope your Missis won’t let you come so unshaven and unshorn as you
  did last time. I did delight in your beautiful flowers which are even
  now on the chimney-piece—one flower I prized above all the rest—I
  could almost fancy Mother picked it—a little tiny bit of jasmine (I
  don’t know if that’s spelt right). It is so nice. Will you remember to
  bring some stamps tomorrow.

  Darling Father I am so anxious to see you again. About 11½ I shall be
  on the tiptoe of hope. You won’t disappoint Sody? You didn’t say it
  was impossible to come, and if it is possible you will. Do bring a few
  more flowers please. Those stones of Cousin Jane’s were lovely. Oh, I
  was so delighted with them.

  Hoping very very soon to see you, I need not write a very long letter
  but please give my best love to my darling darling Mother.

  I am just taxing my small brain to make up a story of a martyrdom in
  Pagan Rome,—a sort of martyrdom at least; it is meant to be very
  affecting, but I don’t know if it is. I will show it you tomorrow I
  hope.

                                 Best best love,
                                                              SOPHY.

  If you have got leave for me to come home it will be _so_ much more if
  you come by yourself to tell me, and if not, if not it will certainly
  need all your presence to comfort me.”

Among other little gifts, on the occasion of this visit, her Father had
given her a tiny note book, which she utilises at once as a diary:

  “Went to sleep with a sore throat ... and a bit of mignonette on my
  bosom. Darling Mother, how I treasure her flowers.

  15th. Knew all my lessons better to-day, and kept my place as 2nd....
  Had a note from Carry. Hurrah, people don’t know how nice it is to get
  a note at school. Done all my algebra for Mr. R. It strikes me we can
  do those problems in Kavanagh by equations.”

The joy of this discovery! “Problems” became her passion: she begged
friends to send her some to solve, and took a mischievous pleasure in
sending them herself occasionally to those who had not been so fortunate
as to find the master-key of the “unknown quantity.” Sister Carry
writes:

  “Many thanks for your letters and numerous sums; I think the latter
  are rather overwhelming to me. I think I ought to have a little more
  instruction when you come, so please don’t send me any more at
  present.”

The diary continues:

  “Did Cousin Jane’s equation and am very glad I have got such a
  sensible cousin. Made one to send her, and then couldn’t answer it
  myself.”

As cricket, tennis and hockey were unheard of in the girls’ school of
those days, and as the child was not allowed to ride or to dance, it is
scarcely surprising to learn that she was again troubled with weakness
of the joints. Mrs. H. took her to one “Professor Georgii” and the
school doctor met them at his house. The patient’s account of the
interview is interesting in view of later developments:

  “Then he went into another room which was rather dark. Dr. L. said, ‘I
  suppose I may come too. I am the physician,’ and G. said, ‘I suppose
  so’!”

The two men examined her spine—the headmistress, of course, being
present—

  “and after about ten minutes I was allowed to dress with the 2 men
  staring at me. I think they might have let us retire....

  The room for exercises is hung all round with prints of skeletons and
  flayed human beings, tho’ for a mercy they were covered with sort of
  curtains and only partially visible.”

She was condemned to an hour’s remedial exercises every day for six
weeks, and as it took double that time to make the pilgrimage to and
from the “Professor’s” house, three fatiguing hours were taken out of
her working day.

And all for want of a few games in due season.

The “sheer stuff of life” was proving educative enough at this time, for
Mrs. Jex-Blake and Sister Carry were both alarmingly ill, the latter
with some contagious fever, the nature of which is not specified. It is
touching to see the Father’s letters to his schoolgirl daughter: the
handwriting has all at once become shaky and feeble, like that of an old
man.

  “I write in the dear Mother’s room,” he says in November, 1854, “in
  which and in sweet Carry’s I pass the greater part of the day. They
  have both been _very_ ill, but I think I may say that now both are
  beginning to mend.... From the beginning of their illnesses they have
  never been able to see each other.... Oh, my darling child, I must not
  conceal from you the danger the best of Mothers has been in. God give
  you to value her more than ever, and keep you from ever, by
  disobedience of any kind, hurting her feelings and giving her pain.”

Two days later he writes again in answer to her eager enquiries,

  “If, darling, I _can_ buy anything with your money that I think Mummy
  or Carry will be pleased with, be sure I will.”

And again, three weeks later,

  “My dear child,—Your letters give me great pleasure, but, great though
  it be, I will most willingly give it up to dearest Mother and Sister
  when they are well enough to read and write letters.”

On Dec. 5th, 1854, his mind is sufficiently at ease to write a truly
delightful letter, though the handwriting is still shaky:

  “First and most substantially (if not principally) the “plum pudding”
  plan. It is really a capital one—‘The Crimea Army Fund’ or some such
  title it bears, and subscriptions are pouring in to it from high and
  low—donations of hundreds of pounds down to sixpences. It does not in
  _any way_ interfere with the sending out of what you rightly enough
  consider are things of still greater importance; and which (much later
  than it ought to have been) the government and the public are now
  despatching to the poor sufferers. The intention is to send out vessel
  after vessel as quickly as possible, not only with materials for plum
  puddings and brown stout, but to help our poor soldiers, officers and
  privates, to get through the great hardships and privations of their
  severe winter campaign, as far as that can be managed. Warm extra
  clothing, flannel shirts and waistcoats, stockings, gloves, leather of
  various kinds, needles and thread, tea, tobacco, sugar, preserved and
  potted meats, _raisins_, sugar, wine, _porter_ and a hundred other
  things in large quantities—enormous quantities—for at least 40 or
  50,000 men.

  Noblemen are sending deer from their parks, and game to be potted and
  preserved and sent over, and some have offered their yachts to convey
  the good things; and tradespeople have come forward to give liberally
  from the stocks in their shops and warehouses. So I shall enclose 1s.
  and think you cannot do better than give it as your mite in the good
  cause. There are as you say ‘such hosts of things to subscribe to,’
  and I am very thankful for the privilege God gives me of being able to
  help. It is one of the greatest luxuries we can enjoy, depend upon it,
  my own darling.... There is no literally ‘war news,’ this week, but
  there have been terrible disasters among the combined fleets in the
  Black Sea. A most furious storm there the middle of last month has
  sadly damaged many of the ships, and destroyed several—one went down
  laden with the intended winter store (in many articles) for our whole
  army,—forty thousand specially warm great coats, and numerous other
  things in proportion, which cannot be replaced instanter, and it is
  feared that very great suffering by thousands for some weeks must be
  the consequence. The loss of that one vessel and cargo is estimated at
  £1,000,000. But, worse than all the money loss, many hundred people
  perished in that and other vessels. Your cousin Robert, whom I don’t
  know that you ever saw even, embarks to-morrow for the Crimea. He is a
  young lieutenant in the 18th foot.

  I think if we keep of the same mind, we can manage a backgammon board
  when you come home, cups and all; only, as I am an old hand at it—
  having played, I should think almost half-a-century ago—you will
  expect, please, to be soundly beaten if we engage together. I have
  read ‘Patronage’—about the same period, perhaps, as when we played
  that game of backgammon, but I do think novels in general are very so-
  so things, and some so wondrous foolish that it is worse than waste of
  time to read them....

  There was a good deal at Worthing[9] that was very pleasant, my sweet
  Sophy, and I can recollect it with satisfaction. If there was anything
  otherwise, it never even crosses my mind, I assure you; and do you get
  rid of all thoughts of it too. I have not the smallest doubt that, by
  God’s blessing, you will be a great ‘comfort’ to me. I have said so a
  thousand times, and you won’t prove Daddy a false prophet I know. I
  have nothing to ‘forgive’ my own child—_nothing whatever_, darling.
  You have had childish faults enough, I daresay, but they were ‘the
  faults of a child’ certainly, and I _could_ not remember a single one
  of them.

  I won’t get a sore throat if I can help it, even for the sake of
  Sody’s black-currant jam; but, if I do catch one, I know I may have a
  whole jar if I want it, and I shall not perhaps like it the less that
  you made it. Love from all. I will not forget to come for you on the
  23rd., my precious child. God keep you and bless you very much.

                                 Your affect. Father,
                                                      T. JEX-BLAKE.”

Footnote 9:

  There is no other reference to the visit to Worthing.

At last, on December 13th, comes a letter from her Mother:

  “DARLING SO,

        I feel very thankful to be once more able to enjoy a letter
  from, and to write to you. I look forward with _great_ pleasure to
  Saturday week, but pray try to be _quiet_ in your joy when I meet you,
  because I am still _weak_ and _soon upset_, and people will be very
  vexed _with you_ if I am the worse. Above all I could wish that you
  did not get into trouble, and say and do what you _should not_,
  because it agitates me to hear of it. If you, my own darling child,
  could but once realise how trying you are by your impetuosity and
  restlessness, and (must I still say?) roughness, even when you are not
  put out, you would try very hard to conquer any outbreaking into extra
  roughness.

  And, indeed, dear So, God has bestowed upon you much wherewith you
  might be agreeable, and help others, if you would but avail yourself
  of it.”

Meanwhile the scrap of a diary goes on:

  “Dec. 16th.... Got a letter from my precious sister. She says she is
  nearly well, but she is so careless of self I half mistrust her
  account, especially as I am told by Mummy and Tom she is very thin and
  pale. She speaks of a chance of her being shaved. I hope to goodness
  she won’t, the darling....

  Thinking of darling Dad’s birthday tomorrow. I hope I shall wake early
  and be first to wish him joy.... His last day to be 64! In his 66th
  year tomorrow. The darling. Sody hopes she’ll make him so happy yet.
  This day week, heigh ho! I must try and persuade Daddy to let me stay
  over Sunday. It will be but one lesson lost and two days gained and
  one a Sunday....

  17th. Dear Dad’s birthday. Woke up once I think, in the dark, and
  again before it was light to wish him many happy returns.”

The wishing must have been volcanic in its intensity to judge by what
follows:

  “While dressing, Kate, who had not got up, woke up to ask if it was
  not his birthday, she had been dreaming it was, and that he in
  consequence was playing a duet on the piano with her, but would play
  the bass first, not together with her.... Mrs. H. ill, not up all day.
  No Mangnall.... I must have walked 6 miles at least. Wonderful for me.
  Had a dispute about extempore sermons, I saying it meant without
  written help, Mlle and Sarah saying people might have notes and yet be
  extempore. Mlle as politely and sapiently as usual called me nobody.
  She has neither sense nor temper to dispute. It is foolish to entangle
  myself with her. My dear Dad’s birthday nearly over.

  18th.... [Mrs. H.] promised I should nurse her when I came back, and I
  did, and after dinner played chess and backgammon with Mrs. H. and
  Conny. Mrs. H. lent me Woodstock to read. Nice, but not equal to some
  of Scott’s.

  Turned out some of my letters from my pocket. Hope I have not turned
  out any I want of Carry’s, but they are safe in my glazed box.

  21st. At Georgii’s had a fuss with Conny in the dressing-room because
  I was complaining of having only a week and asked her if she would
  think a week enough with her Mother. She said no, but her Mother was
  better than mine. I was silly enough to be offended, and gave her two
  good slaps on her shoulders which were convenient, as I was doing her
  frock, and then we had a regular squabble.... I said it was very
  ungenerous. I should not have said it if she had been my guest far
  away from her friends, and I don’t believe I should, though my
  conscience smote me about Mary Bayley.”

This reference to Mary Bayley is interesting, as Sophy had been at no
less than three schools since the days of their companionship. The
persistent recollection of some trifling unkindness is a typical
instance of the compunction she suffered when she hurt anyone _in a way
she understood_.

  “Got such a jolly letter from Mummy as if she had half got back her
  mischief. Two bits of French, too, we are getting on. She certainly
  deserves a ‘satisfaisant’.”

When the Christmas holidays came on, Sophy’s course of exercises from
the “Professor” was not nearly over, and a week’s interruption was the
utmost that could be allowed. The holidays were long enough, however, to
allow of another week at home towards the end of January. Her birthday
fell in this second week, and suggestion was made that the two sisters
should have a party and a “Christmas” tree. The correspondence about
this little event is interesting as showing something of the conditions
in which Sophy would be expected to settle down when her schooldays
finally came to an end. The preparations contrast curiously with what
young folk now-a-days, even in a much humbler walk of life, consider
necessary on these occasions.

                                                  “13 Sussex Square,
                                                        10th Jan.

  DARLING SO,

  I am so much better for the quiet I have had the last week that I
  think I may authorize you to ask Mrs. H. to advance you 4, or, _if_
  needful, 5 shillings to spend in little things for a Christmas tree. I
  am _very_ anxious to have it if _possible_, and I think it entirely
  depends on the self-command _you_ can exert over yourself; if you and
  Carry will go about it _quietly_, and you yield at once if I say I do
  not wish to add to our numbers, or if I object on any other point....

  One thing I must tell you that I cannot have a _great_ many, neither
  do I wish _unnecessary_ expense,[10] when the daily calls from
  societies where funds are failing and souls perishing for want are so
  numerous.”

Footnote 10:

  From their earliest years the children were drilled in the virtue of
  economy. The references to the altering and letting-down of frocks,
  the calculation of pence for ribbon or frill, the careful computation
  of the length of time a pair of boots might be expected to last,—all
  these form instructive reading when one bears in mind the social
  position of the family and the large sums of money which the parents
  habitually gave away.

Sister Carry writes with characteristic calm and reasonableness:

                                                  “13 Sussex Square,
                                                     January 11th.

  DEAR SOPHY,

  I suppose probabilities are now in favour of the Christmas tree. I
  don’t think it need do Mummy much harm, supposing affairs are
  conducted with very unusual prudence and quietness. We shall defer
  buying any ready-made-sweetmeat-ornaments (this is an 8-syllabled
  compound word) until you come home, and then I think Mummy will quite
  like that we should get them without her presence. I also think it
  will be very desirable (if possible) that we should dress up the tree
  without troubling her much; but I don’t know exactly how far we should
  be up to it. However, I think the most important points of all are
  that a certain friend of ours should endeavour to live in, and diffuse
  around her, a certain atmosphere of peace and calmness; and that the
  tree should be quite ready in very good time, so that there should be
  no bustle or worry about it towards the last.... I mean to try to
  provide (with pecuniary assistance from Mummy) some supply of purses,
  penwipers and markers for the tree; I think a couple of cut markers
  such as you gave Daddy the other day, on broad ribbon, would be very
  good; of course I mean _them_ to be made by you. I suppose I shall
  probably have a letter from you tomorrow or Saturday; I consider I
  ought to have had one. With best love, I am, dear Sophy,

                          Your very affectionate sister,
                                                   C. A. JEX-BLAKE.”

Presumably the little festival took place in due course, but there is no
further reference to it among the papers. The strain of loving parental
homilies continues.

  “Bear in mind that _all_ our powers and faculties are perverted by the
  fall, but my child cannot be rid of her responsibility; if you say you
  cannot pray,—that is at once a subject for prayer. Down on your knees
  and tell God so.”

  “I _exceedingly_ like a letter from you, and bustle down a little
  earlier on Tuesday morning that I may have time to enjoy it before
  breakfast.... Cousins Kate and Elinor Jex-Blake say they do not at all
  delight in Mathematics, they are sorry to say.”

  “We are very sorry to disappoint you, but indeed we cannot sanction
  your going to see the ‘Wizard of the North.’ I do hope and believe you
  will submit cheerfully to give up what it would make me very sleepless
  and unhappy to have you go to. Now get a victory and believe the
  disappointment all for the best.”

  “Though I am most decidedly better, it arises, I think, from _perfect
  quiet_, the least change or bustle brings on spasm or headache, or
  both. Carry had Punch, and thought you sent it. I don’t like it, I
  think it a vulgar paper, and don’t wish it sent. I don’t at all object
  to the ‘Illustrated News’ occasionally.”

Apparently Sophy declined to sit down under this condemnation of her
beloved Punch, for a fortnight later Mrs. Jex-Blake writes: “I will
return both the Punches in the hamper. The last was capital.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

In May, 1855, a family holiday in Wales was proposed, and, as usual, the
question was raised whether Sophy could be allowed to be of the party.
There is no suggestion in all the correspondence that her Father ever
wished to be rid of her company _except_ on the ground of his wife’s
health. On May 23rd Mrs. Jex-Blake writes:

  “Daddy and I have a strong wish that you should see Wales, and it is
  truly painful to deny you such a pleasure and advantage but you see,
  dear, I can’t help my health, and the being so easily upset and made
  ill by worry. Indeed I am grieved to find you can fully understand
  this, for you say your head aches if you get excited; but, darling,
  strive to go on with your different duties and don’t get excited....
  Now, sweetest, _assure_ me that you will try to be controlled by me,
  and try to fall into our habits, not always restless and having some
  grand scheme of your own that _must_ be carried out.... I do not ask
  you to promise, but if next week you feel you can, looking to God,
  _assure_ me you will to the utmost try to be a comfort and not break
  out in these violent excitements, which not only upset me at the time
  but haunt and disturb me at night,... we are wonderfully anxious to
  give you the pleasure, but meanwhile don’t be excited at school about
  it.

  Shall we not be happy at Bettws-y-Coed if darling So is with us and we
  _all_ consider each other’s comfort?”

The microscopic school diary had for five months been non-existent; the
imperious demand of this glorious anticipation called a fresh volume
into being.

  “Thursday, May 24th [1855.] My answer was to come about Wales. When I
  got my letter I prayed God to help me to bear it, for I was nearly
  sure it would be a refusal, and I was quite prepared for it and
  determined to keep my promise not to worry about it. I put my letter
  in my pocket and ran away from them all. Then I burst it open and
  read, ‘Daddy and I have such a strong wish you should see Wales, and
  it is truly painful to deny you such a pleasure.’ There, thought I,
  but I had expected it and didn’t feel so dreadfully disappointed. Then
  I read on and oh, I found it _was not so_, that I should go. Oh, I got
  so excited and half began to cry. Then came Mummy’s caution not to be
  excited, but it was impossible. Dropped down there and thanked God.
  Oh, then I trust He has granted my prayer. Glory to God in the
  highest. Oh, I was so thankful.

  25th.... Got a letter from Tom. How kind of him to write, it really
  was, and he has got a first bachelor’s degree. G. told me he saw his
  name in the paper.

  Had a great shortness and pain in taking long breaths. G. said there
  was some irregularity in the heart, I believe. Laurie came in
  afternoon and said my heart was wrong again. Left me some medicine.

  28th. Mrs. H. told me to lie down and sleep if I felt tired, but I am
  much better.... K. seized on ‘Prince and Peasant’ and M. on ‘Anecdotes
  of Animals’ the 2 books Miss Smith had left me. I was very cross, I
  had nothing to do. I seized on Anecdotes after Prayers to take up. M.
  was in high dudgeon, as if it was her right. But I carried it off. But
  upstairs I thought it was not right. ‘In honour _preferring_ one
  another.’ So I took it her. But it was a hard struggle.... I am glad I
  got that little victory.

  Miss C. came to G.‘s for the last time. I was so sorry and so were
  most folks. She gave me a little parcel, or at least put it in my
  pocket on condition I should not open it till I got home. I thought it
  was some mischief but took it. It was such a lovely gold pencil case,
  ‘from a schoolgirl.’ Dear girl, it was very kind of her.

  30th. Very difficult geometry problem. I doubt if I can do it.
  Mortimer was home, and told us some very good stories of —— the nurse
  of his ward. Mrs. H. said in the evening she would like to be nurse
  there (!) She said how should I get on who so hate injustice, and I
  said I thought such open acknowledged injustice was not the hardest to
  bear. This brought down an awful storm of wonder, reasoning, etc.,
  till at length I got off to bed _so_ tired.

  June 1st. A little fracas with Mlle at G.’s. Little Henriquez is here.
  It is strange to be with a Jew and a R. Catholic so closely. Con
  rather worrying, and I not _rather_ cross. Oh, dear, ‘Charity never
  faileth.’ ‘The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
  sight of God of great price.’

  Laurie came and left me some more medicine.

  4th. Miss Teed’s birthday. Many happy returns to her. Wonder if Carry
  remembers.... I want so to know Minnie’s exact birthday.

  know it is near....

  Went in the gardens. K. and S. persecuted me with grass and I can’t
  run after them. When I caught S. and when we were indoors I gave it
  her rather roughly. She was very cross and would not have any of [my]
  jam at tea, she never will when she is cross with me. Got a sore
  throat.

  5th. Throat very fairly bad, and very ‘cheval’ as M. would say.
  Apropos it’s her birthday....

  Just before prayers I was in the cupboard and someone shut the door
  nearly on me. I threw it open again and half upset the great slate. We
  had been rather uproarious all afternoon as M’s sisters had been here
  and said holidays did begin on 18th. When I came out of the cupboard I
  managed to tread on M’s toes, and Mlle packed me off to bed. I said
  ‘All right,’ shook hands with her, kissed S. and went off. Mlle wasn’t
  very angry nor I very sorry and so we were all very _comfable_. Seized
  on K. for a kiss as she came up and she seemed forbidden to speak to
  me. However we had a nice hug and she wasn’t very horrified.

  6th. Found a handbill on my dressing-table from Mrs. H. ‘for Sophy’
  called Telling Jesus.”

This entry closes the school diary.

                  *       *       *       *       *

She seems to have remained at the Notting Hill school till Easter, 1856,
and to have carried away with her the warm good will and genuine—if
sorely tried—respect of her headmistress, Mrs. H., with whom she kept up
a correspondence for some time. For another year and a half she seems to
have attended some school at Brighton within reach of her home, but
study here was discouraged, and she became the patient of another
doctor—or quack?—who prescribed a course of rubbing.

  “Under the new regulation of no study,” writes Mrs. H., “I suppose you
  have plenty and to spare of the dolce far niente. I smiled at the ‘few
  lessons,’ and wondered in what occupation you might possibly spend
  your 24 hours.... Be assured, dear Sophy, that so much trifling and
  frivolity is culpable in the sight of Heaven. It is an unworthy waste
  of God’s gifts, and you are capable of something so much better!”

That life, even now, was not all “trifling and frivolity” is obvious
from the following letter, which was written a few weeks later:

                                           “Monday, Sept. 8th. 1856.

  MY OWN DARLING MOTHER,

        This subject of confirmation has come up again, and I really
  must say I am positively shocked at the way it is settled and talked
  about. It is ‘How old are you?’ ‘Does your Papa wish you to be
  confirmed?’ and never, ‘Are you fit to be?’ or ‘Do you really wish
  it?’ It is just as if it were a history lecture to be attended. I
  really think it is wicked. Miss H. took it for granted that I should
  be and stuck down my name. I said, ‘No thank you, Miss H.,’ to her
  great indignation. I assured her you wished me to do exactly as I
  liked on such a subject, which she did not choose to believe at all.

  But I really do wish it, Mother. I think it would help me, and I long
  to take the Lord’s Supper with you. Will you let me be confirmed from
  home?—that is, spend the actual day of confirmation at home, so that I
  may think of something besides how I am dressed and how good or bad an
  examination I passed, on the day I take those solemn promises on
  myself. Mother, dear, I seem less able to speak to you than anyone,
  but I do feel very much about it. It is just,—‘I have gone astray like
  a lost sheep, seek Thy servant, for I do not forget Thy commandments,’
  I do hope. No, I _can’t_ write what I mean or anything else. Just
  write me one line by return of post. Mr. E. is certainly not the
  minister I should have chosen, nor Miss H.’s the place I should have
  preferred, but I don’t think that ought to stand in the way, for it is
  not in respect to them I stand.

  I think I should have preferred waiting another year, but I don’t
  think I can quite expect God’s blessing on His child while I defer
  owning myself such.

  Oh, Mother, Mother, how I wish you were here, but it seems as if He
  had expressly left me to myself each time confirmation has been spoken
  of. I do not think you will refuse either the permission I ask, or
  your blessing on the step I take,—unless it would be too great an
  excitement for you,—though it need not be, for you need not go with
  me....

  Well, darling, just tell me what you mean and think. But pray, pray,
  don’t show any of this to anyone....

  God bless and keep my darling Mother.

  Farewell, precious.

                                         Your own child,
                                                             SOPHY.”

“I like the idea of your being confirmed very much,” her Father had
written some months before. “God’s blessing be with you. Look to Him and
be happy.”

Sophy’s first schoolmistress, Mrs. Teed, took a different view of the
matter:

                                                    “10th Oct. 1856.

  DEAREST SOPHY,

        Your dear Mother tells me you are soon to be _confirmed_. When I
  read her letter I thought to myself,—Confirmed!—in what?—in following
  your own foolish ways? There needs no confirmation in that....

  You told me in a letter written to me on my last birthday that you
  hoped you were one of Christ’s little ones. O dear Sophy, you know
  better.... I do not say do not deceive yourself, but I say never seek
  to deceive others,” and so on.

Those who have read with some sympathy the preceding pages may well be
inclined to doubt whether Sophy was “seeking to deceive others,” or
rather, perhaps, whether deception with her did not more readily take
the form of concealing the depth and reality of her religious life.
Christ’s lambs have not all been precisely of the type good Mrs. Teed
had in mind. The real difficulty, however, is to fit the child into the
categories of the pious people among whom she lived, or indeed, into any
category at all. For better or for worse, she belonged to another plane
of being.

If one were compelled to adopt the system of classification current in
those days, one could but fall back with thankfulness on the remembrance
of that “hasty image” of the Good Shepherd in the Catacombs,

              “And, on his shoulders, not a lamb, a kid.”

In any case the stormy chequered school career had now come to a close.
“I can’t fancy you, Sophy, with long frocks,” an old school-friend
writes, “taller than Hetty, a regular grown-up young lady. Are you
transformed yet? Do let me see you first like your own old dear self!”

“Your own old dear self!” One almost weeps to think of all the
_unnecessary_ friction and waste of energy in those school days. Those
of us who have been teachers know how often the troublesome pupil proves
to be the pick of the basket,—the keen student and the loyal co-worker:
and perhaps more than one headmistress who reads these pages will wish
that she had been privileged to have the training of Sophia Jex-Blake.
Many admirable women prayed and wept over her in those days, struggled
to make her all they thought she ought to be; and, if their perseverance
and devotion seemed to be inadequately rewarded, this was due to no
fault of theirs. They were what the Society of that day demanded, what
Society made them. They were wanting only in what just chanced to be
almost the one thing needful,—_the modern spirit_. Rather behind their
own day, their lot was to be the trainers of a girl, who—unconsciously
to herself—was far in advance of her own day,—a girl who would have
appreciated to the utmost the free boyish education of our High Schools
for girls, and who—had it been her good fortune to have lived under such
auspices—might have written a somewhat different page in the book of
life.




                               CHAPTER V
                              LIFE AT HOME


It is with a definite sense of relief that one takes up the thread of S.
J.-B.’s life after she leaves school. She is still, it is true, a
problem and a perplexity to many, and sometimes to those who loved her
best: but at least she appeals now to a wider tribunal: her qualities
get a chance to tell, even if they do not precisely conform to the
pattern laboriously cut out by an early Victorian schoolmistress.

Her health, unhappily, still left a good deal to be desired. The doctors
had much to say of the irritability of her brain. The stethoscope was
supposed, too, to reveal something wrong with her heart, but this must
have been functional, as no trace of it was discoverable in after life.
Riding, fortunately was now allowed, and she entered into the enjoyment
of it with characteristic intensity; but beyond this, in the early days
of her—comparative—freedom, she certainly took no pains to improve her
physique. The enterprising young women of those days had still so much
to learn! It seldom occurred to them to balance their physical
expenditure with their receipts.

Meanwhile it is not to be supposed that her parents had gained _greater_
control over her than when she was a child: they remained quite
uncompromising in the matter of dancing, theatre-going, and other
“worldly” amusements, but they were unsuccessful in making her conform
to the ordinary, wholesome, old-fashioned routine of English family
life. Naturally her self-will in this respect annoyed both parents very
much, and Mrs. Jex-Blake must often have been sorely put to it to
restrain her own impatience and to preserve any semblance of peace.

To her credit be it said that she rose to a difficult situation in a
manner that makes praise an impertinence. One is glad to gather from the
records that her physical health was now on a firmer basis than
formerly, but that was only one element in the case. Always a deeply
religious woman, she seems to have stepped now into the full freedom of
her faith,—faith, not only in God, but in the essential goodness and
uprightness of her wayward child. She seems to have realized fully for
the first time that the stormy ways which tried her so sorely were not a
mere matter of whim and wilfulness, but that they arose from a definite
strain in her daughter,—a strain that caused no small suffering to the
owner of that nature,—a strain possibly fundamental in character,
certainly far too deeply imbedded to be easily eradicated. And, having
realized this, the Mother set herself, not as before to criticise the
evil, but to foster and rejoice in the good, to make life as easy as
might be, to reduce friction to a minimum, and, above all, to surround
her daughter with a real glow and radiance of sympathy.

How sorely tried that sympathy must often have been, we can partly
understand when we compare the old-world fragrance of the Mother’s
personality with all that is suggested to us now by the name of Sophia
Jex-Blake. “When I was young,” the Mother used to say, “it was not a
question of _whether_ we should marry, but simply of _whom_ we should
marry.” And to her lot fell a daughter who rarely thought of marriage at
all, whose brain was teeming with all sorts of unfettered boyish
ambitions, who made it clear to everyone whom it might concern that she
meant to live her own life,—to “make good the faculties of herself” in
the way that pleased her best.

And yet there was something in all this audacious, spontaneous life that
found an answering chord in the Mother’s heart. She was not a phlegmatic
conventional person by nature herself. She too, perhaps, long before,
had beaten eager wings against the bars. In any case from this time on
the friendship between the two was a sacred thing, never flagging,
comparable with the most beautiful friendships in history.

Fortunately we have S. J.-B.’s own account of those first days at home:

  “1857. Dec. 17th. Thursday. Came home for good. For good? Who can
  tell? Oh, what would I give to look forward ten, aye five, short
  years, and see what I shall be. Just 18; half my life at school. Then
  28. Dr. Moore says,—and there seems a strange prophecy in his words,—
  that I shall be something, something good if not great, but not in the
  way I hope;[11] that ‘on a ruin of broken columns and shattered
  Grecian capitols, shall be laid the foundation of a temple of God.’
  There’s something comes home to my heart in those shattered columns,—

                  ‘The dearest idol I have known,
                    Whate’er that idol be,
                  Help me to tear it from _Thy_ throne,
                    And worship only _Thee_.’

  Oh, that I had the strength, the faith, to pray so honestly,—but God
  help me! I have prayed little enough lately. I seem in such a torpor,
  such a prostration of mind, body, and, I fear, soul. I hope there is
  much physical in this.

  That beautiful hymn,—‘What peaceful hours I once enjoyed!’ _Once_. So
  it is, and _now_. Never mind; I think God must have some mercy, some
  hope, to me when He has given and preserved to me my darling, my angel
  Mother. She seems a pledge of hope.

  Well, shall I be a great authoress as my day and night dreams prompt
  me to hope?... Shall I ever be a happy wife and mother? Shall I ere
  ten years, or half ten years have passed, be _dust_?... I sometimes
  think so. (June 1st. 1869. At any rate never thought of being a
  sawbones.)

  Dec. 25th. How awfully sentimental my first entries do look!... Daddy
  says he is sorry I have anything that ‘wants a lock.’ Hm, how very
  well he understands me and my wants! Never mind; dear old man, he is
  very loving and kind if not brilliant. Oh, Mother, Mother, what should
  I do without you?... Just said how earnestly I hoped never to see one
  dear to me die, that I may die first. ‘Oh, don’t think of self at all,
  Sophy,’ she said, ‘Just see what good you can do.’ Right.

  31st. Writing now in my own dear room, darling Mother, how every
  article in it speaks of her love! They have gone to a New Year’s Eve
  prayer meeting at St. Mark’s School,—uncommonly slow, I should think.
  I do think however ‘good’ I became,—or rather I wonder whether I ever
  could like such very slow spiritualities. Still there’s Bishop
  Wilberforce and his ‘scaffolding.’ Don’t cry ‘spirit’ and take away
  ‘means,’—remove the scaffolding because its work is not accomplished.”

Footnote 11:

  “Dec. 20th, 1859. Strange truth this: How already that hope has
  changed!”

For some time she had been writing a story based on her own school life
at Mrs. Teed’s,—a story that was never finished. It is very well written
of course, but diffuse, and interesting chiefly for its autobiographical
touches. She is intensely loyal to both school and schoolmistress, and
one feels on reading her descriptions a fresh sense of regret that it
should have been necessary to take her away from an atmosphere that
seems in many ways to have suited her so well.

One episode is definitely autobiographical, and it is of more than
passing interest. The small schoolchildren in the story, playing at
“shop,” have helped themselves to a quantity of “jewels” in the shape of
scraps of coloured quartz, etc., from a grotto in the garden. The theft
being discovered, the heroine is called up first, and, in great fear and
trembling, owns to having taken one of the fragments. Questioned as to a
second, and fearing to add to her condemnation, she falters, “I don’t
know.” Due punishment follows (banishment to bed and enforced reading of
the chapter about Eli’s sons), then a public scene in hall and
forgiveness. Now comes the point of the episode:

  “But still there was one leaden weight on me,—the story I had told
  [Mrs. Teed] the day before. It seemed as though the forgiveness was
  not thorough, nor of full value while part of the offence was
  concealed. How easy it would have been I now saw to confess the whole
  offence at once, how difficult now! Remembrance, however, of the
  sorrow of the day before, and some innate love of truth, as I hope,
  urged me on, and when, after prayers [Mrs. Teed] passed away through
  the door at the extreme end of the schoolroom, I ran to meet her at
  the foot of the great staircase which she must ascend to her private
  rooms, and said hurriedly, ‘Mothy, I think I did not tell you quite
  the truth yesterday. I said I did not know who picked out the bit of
  yellow quartz. I think I _did_ know I did.’

  ‘Thank God, my child,’ she said gently but solemnly, ‘that you have
  told me the truth now. It is better than a thousand pieces of
  quartz.’...

  Reward enough I certainly had at the time in my lightened heart from
  that moment, but the effort I had made seemed hardly to merit such
  rich recompense as it received some time after when I heard that Mothy
  had said that she would believe everything told her by [S. J.-B.] as
  if she had seen it herself.

  Oh, how proud and happy was I at that moment, and the desire fully to
  merit testimony so inexpressibly sweet to me had, I verily believe,
  far more effect on the truthfulness of all my after life than any
  suffering or punishment could have had; and it in great measure saved
  me from sinking utterly in after time into that slough of deceit into
  which almost all schoolgirls do fall at one time or another in more
  difficult circumstances and in the midst of a lower tone than that of
  Hertford House. And,—though many will deem, and perhaps rightly, the
  distinction of little worth,—though often in those after days, under
  less noble rule, guilty of equivocation, I do not think I ever from
  that day told a lie.”

We return to the diary:

  “1858. Jan. 7th.... I must begin to write again if I don’t mean to
  lose the knack ... and so ought to go on with Hertford House or write
  something.... I want partly to write for the money,—now why, I wonder?
  Honestly, why? I have plenty of everything. In a handsome if not
  luxurious home, 6 servants all much at my orders, lots of rides, a
  most loving Mother, tender father, almost every wish gratified, £30 a
  year clear, and lots of presents, almost at will,—why I should write
  for money unless I am avaricious or spendthrift I don’t exactly know.
  Partly for the _pride_ of earning it,—of knowing myself as well able
  to earn my bread as my inferiors. Surely, though, I ought least of all
  in my list of comforts—blessing, should I say?—to omit my most happy,
  most snug nutshell of a room, with its handsome furniture, cosy fire,
  and thoroughly comfortable arrangements. How truly loving my most
  precious pearl of a Mother has been to me in this especially....

  I have conceived a rather wild idea of writing to Miss M. for counsel
  and sympathy.... But how get a letter to her? And, if I did, would she
  think it a bore? I think not. Send the letter to her publishers?
  _Sure_ not to be opened? Then what to say if I do write? What do I
  want? Don’t exactly know.

  Well, leave it.

  Now for the more important at least more solemn part of todays
  journal. And I must make this _some_ use. Just heard a sermon from Mr.
  Vaughan on ‘Truth,’—Gehazi being the scape-goat of warning. He spoke
  strongly of allowing ourselves to say more on religious subjects than
  we feel, calling it a dangerous deception and leading to worse. But
  does that include speaking a word—earnest and sincere at least—about
  the souls of others, tho’ our own may not be safe? Often at school I
  have felt driven to speak very solemnly to girls about their souls
  when I feel I am not worthy to say a word, for mine is perhaps as lost
  as theirs,—and often and often have risen in my throat,—‘Lest when I
  have preached to others I myself become a castaway.’ Yet if I am,—oh,
  fearful word, I can hardly write it,—if lost (oh, God, save me!) can
  it, would it not console, if consolation were possible,—to know I had
  warned others from the pit into which I fell. And I hope I may have
  done some little good.... And how happy I have felt—and better in
  myself too,—if I have even for a moment led some to think of Jesus
  else forgotten....

  Dearest Mrs. Teed is dead. ‘Blessed are the dead that die in the
  Lord.’ ‘Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be
  like his!’...

  Dear Carry! At a moment like this I can’t help thinking ‘The righteous
  is more excellent than his neighbour.’ Oh, how far, _far_ more
  excellent than I am and yet I have sometimes almost despised her
  because perhaps she has less intellectual power, for I do believe God
  has given me some genius,—surely there is no pride in saying so,
  remembering His grace, who gave thee all.

  Jan. 8th. Feel very much as if I had been sentimentalizing last night.
  I wish I could keep in one frame of mind.

  Jan. 10th. Sunday. Just been reading the ch. on ‘Happy and Unhappy
  Women’ in ‘Woman’s Thoughts.’ The Authoress speaks strongly about a
  sort of repining and melancholy, and about neglected health and almost
  voluntary sickness,—i.e. voluntary in not taking proper remedies and
  safe-guards,—and I cannot but feel much she says is not more than
  truth.

  She urges action, usefulness.

  Now I cannot but consider whether it does not become me to attend to
  her hints, or rather to her arguments. _Well_ I am not. Over mental
  exertion may have had, and I believe has had, very bad effects, still
  whether by my own fault directly or indirectly I don’t make matters
  worse, is another question. And certainly my Father and Mother are
  getting wretchedly anxious about me ... perhaps, unless I make an
  effort, I may find life ebbing ere half its purposes are
  accomplished....

  At all events efforts are mine, though results are God’s. Yet tho’ I
  try to draw brilliant pictures of the future, and to persuade myself
  life is sweet, I can’t but feel that, if I were once assured of peace
  with God, I could be well content, nay grateful, to escape the waves
  of this troublesome world, and flee away and be at rest. Rest! Surely
  it is hardly natural at my age to be longing for it so....[12] But
  coward! take God’s benefits and flee His service, His battle? It
  should be our’s ‘to _act_ and to suffer, to do and to pray.’ No, it
  cannot be right to flee rather than to overcome.

Footnote 12:

    This longing for rest was something deeper than the ordinary
    sentimentality of adolescence. She always said that by nature she
    was lazy, and the saying was not devoid of truth.

  Well, to return. If I am, and ought, to preserve my health, how?
  Suppose I make some kind of _plan_ for the day, not rigid but
  suggestive.

  Rise, breakfast with the rest of the world. 8½.

  Have for walk till 11.

  Then either some master or work for myself,—writing, painting, etc.,
  till dinner. 1.

  Afternoon will be sure to be taken up with driving. Come in about 4.
  Then read till tea. After tea write, or read out downstairs. And go to
  bed with the rest of the world.

  That would be rather more rational than my present programme:

  Rise and breakfast at 11 or later. Dawdle till dinner.

  Drive. Read till tea. Read or write till 2 or 3 a.m. Well, that does
  sound bad....

                  *       *       *       *       *

  Mother and I were talking about my marrying,—the chances pro and con.
  I said I did not fancy I should ever marry, for I thought I should
  require too many qualities to meet in the man I could think of as my
  husband, for it to be likely that I should ever meet such a paragon
  who could be willing to marry me.

  Let me see; the indispensables are I think:—A perfect gentleman, a
  sincere Christian, a liberal-minded broad-churchman; a lofty intellect
  to which it would be a pride to bow, a firm will which it would be a
  pleasure to submit to and concur in; a nice-looking fellow,—for I
  _could_ not be happy with one whose face I could not love and admire
  in beauty of expression if not of form, and one whose means combined
  with mine would lift us above genteel poverty at least....

                  *       *       *       *       *

  Had another squabble with Carry because she told me my own Hertford
  House, which I was looking over, was not fit for Sunday. She does
  meddle awfully. Still, she’s a precious sight better than I am....
  Bother her slow blood! She’ll drive me mad, she and Daddy between
  them. Never mind, I have got my jewel of a Mother, bless her!

  24th. Sunday. Talking in the evening about an old woman in Carry’s
  district who came from the Barrack Ground, Hastings. And that put it
  strong into my head how I wanted to go there. I had on Saturday
  evening written a letter to Amelia about the treat, and then I thought
  how nice it would be to go and give the treat myself.

  30th. Saturday. Seven years today since I last saw old Hastings. Isn’t
  it strange to return that day seven years! Pouring wet day. Rather
  afraid of being disappointed in Hastings, I do love it so. But I
  seemed so to have gone over and over every part in my dreams that I
  could not be disappointed. I know it all so well.... After dinner went
  to call on the Andrews. I thought I would go incog. and see if they
  remembered me. Amelia opened the door. ‘I think the Miss Andrews live
  here?’ ‘Yes, ma’am.’ ‘Are you not connected with the Infant School?’
  ‘Yes, ma’am.’ I asked if I might come and see the children. She
  assented quite soberly. I couldn’t stand it, jumped at her, and pinned
  her to the wall for a kiss. She knew me in a moment, seized my hands
  and dragged me in in wild delight....

  Then I went to No. 3 [Croft Place] and when Mrs. L. said she did not
  know me, I said, ‘I wonder if the house does, for I was born in it.’
  Then she knew me instantly.”

All this gives a vivid picture of the warm heart and riotous spirits
that endeared her to her friends, but there are not wanting indications
of the mysterious depression and forebodings—the dread of something
worse than death—that are part of the heritage of gifted youth.

  “26th. Friday. I am afraid I don’t care near so much for—as I did,—am
  I changeable or is she changed? or is my standard altered?... I read
  once of a person whose physical condition was such that he _could_ not
  love one person intensely for long,—not many years if thrown much
  together.... I sometimes fear I am similarly constituted. For even
  those nearest and dearest I have experienced those fluctuations.... It
  is like a frightful trance to know that I _cannot_ keep a warm deep
  love equal; and yet in a manner the real undercurrent of love flows on
  even in these estrangements,—I cannot in _myself_ cease to love one
  who has ever been the object of that wild adoring love, though in my
  outer mind and heart this tormenting, fiendlike malady makes me hate
  and shrink from them while its fearful influence reigns. God grant
  there is no touch of insanity in it; no words can tell how I dread and
  deprecate it. There is a loathsome horrible fear in my mind of its
  coming ever and anon. My ..., my beautiful, whom I used to think
  mysteriously close to my soul, it has come on her. Oh, God pity me! I
  fear I shall go wild. Every action, every word of her’s seems to anger
  me unreasonably,—I feel the fiend on me and yet the wild resistless
  love will not quite be swept away, and comes back in floods of passing
  tenderness for a moment. And I can’t tell her, make her understand,
  and she will lose her love for me and—oh, dear I am very miserable.
  God grant in pity it may never fall on my Mother! I have a horrible
  dread of it. I could not live without her love,—my love for her. And I
  feel such wild maddening love now, as if I knew it would soon be out
  of my power to love her.”

This, of course, is morbid, and yet here again one is forced to say that
her depression is neither feigned nor wholly without reason. Many people
have experienced in some degree the elemental fitfulness which she
describes, and she probably understood it better than most. And yet how
many can testify to her fundamental and self-sacrificing constancy! But
there is no doubt that at this period she was living far too self-
absorbed a life,—dreaming too much, thinking too much of herself. It was
time for something to happen, and fortunately something did happen. Two
breezy wholesome girl cousins—half Irish, half Norfolk—came to Sussex
Square on a visit. They were the daughters of Ferrier Jex-Blake, S. J.-
B.’s uncle, but it chanced that she had never met them before. She was
out dining with friends when they arrived.

  “When I did come home, I went to take off my things, then to the
  drawing-room, kissed them coolly enough, said, ‘How d’ye do, cousins?’
  and sat down to _rattle_. Tried hard to shock them with all sorts of
  nonsense, and then carried them to see my room, and made them some
  coffee. They, Elinor and Sarah, knew nothing of me, and did not much
  admire me, I guess, that night.”

By degrees, however, a very warm friendship sprang up.

  “Oh, dear, those two girls!” she writes a fortnight later. “What a
  flood of happiness they have brought into the house. And made me
  behave a little too. Sarah makes me attend to my hair. Oh, dear, home
  is a different place since they have been here. I am _so_ happy. All
  my gloom and troubles swept off like cobwebs.”

When they are gone, she writes pages of analysis of their characters,
and very able analysis it is. This is how it concludes:

  “I feel as if I mean to love Ellie most, and Sarah forces me to love
  her most. I love Ellie most in my mind, and Sarah most in my heart.
  Sarah clings to me so, leans on me. Ellie walks upright beside me, a
  companion, a guide, and gives me a hand. There certainly is something
  of the angel about Ellie, with much of the woman. You don’t connect
  the idea of angel with Sarah.

  Sarah will do almost anything for me. I do not think she has refused
  me one thing since she loved me. She rode with me when no one on earth
  could get her to mount a horse; she went in a boat with me, though she
  never will enter one. Oh, she is so good, so loving to me. I wish I
  had her always.

  And I am going to them at Dunham, my darlings.”

When it became known that she was going on a visit to Great Dunham, a
number of Norfolk relatives on both sides of the house asked her to
visit them also, and the result was that for the next two months she had
quite a gay time,—beginning with her Mother’s elder sister, Mrs. Taylor,
and going from her to the Ferrier Jex-Blakes, the Evans, the Blake
Humfreys, the Cubitts and others. As a rule—not without exceptions—she
captivated her girl cousins, proved very attractive to her uncles and
elderly male cousins, and contrived to rub along with her aunts. “I
never appreciated my old Daddy till now,” she writes on one occasion, “I
really believe, as Mummy says, he never said an _un-nice_ thing in his
life, or approached a coarse or ungentlemanly joke. He is certainly a
beau-ideal gentleman, ‘Chevalier sans reproche.’”

Of one family she says, “Not very quiet and not specially dutiful.
Rather reminds me of us, only they are more good-tempered over it.”

  “Uncle Evans amused me exceedingly at lunch yesterday, giving his
  opinion in quite energetic style, and as if he had studied the
  subject, that not only I should marry, which I said I shouldn’t, but
  very soon.... Heaven knows who it could be.... I never saw the man I
  would have.”

At Wroxham she made the acquaintance of a cousin, Robert Blake-Humfrey,
who was deeply interested in questions of pedigree, heraldry, etc., and
he found in the creator of Sackermena an apt pupil.

  “Hurrah! Going in for a good morning’s work at the pedigree. 9¼.

  Near one! well, well! I certainly have had pedigree to my heart’s
  content. Been hard at work for 3½ hours till my back aches and I am
  properly tired. Never mind, I have learned a good deal and secured a
  good deal. It is very kind of Robert to trust me with his valuable
  pedigrees, so beautifully emblazoned.”

Mr. Blake-Humfrey was good enough to consider that he too derived
benefit from the lessons. “Your observant eyes,” he writes when she is
gone, “have done good service in sundry ways towards the correction of
errors, which may atone in some measure for the mischief they are well-
calculated to cause in other ways.”

On May 28th she visited her Mother’s old home, Honing Hall, and made the
acquaintance of an elderly uncle who was something of a character.

  “He offered lunch, and then took us up to see the rooms. All shutters
  up, and had to be re-opened and re-shut. In an upstairs sitting-room I
  unluckily wanted to see a Family Bible, and said, ‘Is that the Family
  Bible with the names, etc.?’ ‘Yes, it is. You leave it alone—unless
  you want to see it.’ I persisted I did and he took it down. Then out
  came Burke’s Gentry and _alia_.... I thought I should have been eaten
  up the way he roared at me. I asked if he hadn’t a pedigree, and he
  almost roared again, wanting to know what I could want better than
  Burke. I might have told him there were no shields, no intermarriages,
  etc., but I held my peace, he really frightened me. I got him to show
  me my dear old Mother’s room as a girl, and kissed the bed and
  furniture. Thought of her as a girl there, her fun and her troubles,
  her courting-days perhaps and the letters and thought and hopes that
  room had witnessed. My precious darling Mother!”

In July she returned to Brighton, “much better and better-tempered” as
she expresses it, for the outing. Richer, too, she was, in her whole
outlook on life, and particularly in the knowledge of her girl-cousins,
Elinor and Sarah Jex-Blake, and Mary Evans, with all of whom the
friendship was to prove a lasting one.

A month later, to Sophy’s great joy, Cousin Ellie accompanied the Sussex
Square party on a holiday visit to Wales.

Primary education at Bettws-y-Coed was at a low ebb in those days, the
village school being in the hands of a cobbler whose acquirements were
not great, and whose idea of discipline was primitive in the extreme.
Caroline and Sophy Jex-Blake became deeply interested in the children
and gradually fell into the habit of taking a class in reading,
arithmetic, geography, etc. It was an arrangement that gave great
satisfaction to all concerned, and one into which Sophy entered with
whole-hearted enthusiasm. One is not surprised to gather from the
letters of the period that she awakened a feeling deeper than interest
in one of the professional men with whom she was brought in contact, but
the diary makes no reference to the fact, and she may not even have been
aware of it.

“To me and to others as far as I can judge,” writes Cousin Ellie about
this date, “she is the warmest-hearted person ever I came across.”

And six months later, reviewing the events of an eventful year, S. J.-B.
writes:

  “But among the events of the old year, first and chief, my becoming
  friends with my darlings, my stars, and getting acquainted with the
  Evans and all the Norfolk folks.”




                               CHAPTER VI
                        LIFE AT QUEEN’S COLLEGE


Meanwhile, in the world outside, the feminist movement was beginning to
make itself felt,—if one may describe by so inadequate a name an
uprising which is due perhaps as much to the men as to the women who
have taken part in it. As regards the whole movement S. J.-B. was living
as completely in a backwater as was possible to a girl of her position
and natural gifts; but sooner or later a current from the main river was
bound to come in even to her little creek.

In the spring of 1858 she had made the acquaintance of Miss Benson,
sister of the Archbishop. “Henry and Ada Benson came,” is the brief
record in her diary. “Pleasant, jolly girl, Ada.” The wanderings of that
pleasant summer hindered the development of the friendship for the
moment, but the thread was happily taken up again in the autumn.

  “Yesterday went with Ada to the Swedish minstrels. Very strange and
  beautiful.... After concert went for a drive in the pony-chaise. Just
  beyond the battery a carriage and pair drove into us. Coachman got
  down and was very civil. Everyone said it was no fault of mine; he was
  trying to cut in between two. I was not the least frightened.

  Speaking to Ada on Thursday night revived the idea of Queen’s College.
  Her sister there. Wrote Friday for prospectus. Tried to speak to Daddy
  last night. He very impracticable, I after a while very undutiful. At
  last I went into hysterics[13] which frightened him dreadfully, poor
  old man. I shall certainly go, I think. Michaelmas term begins 4th
  prox. I should very much like a year’s or even less, good work, and a
  few certificates.

  Very good last night Ada Benson’s story of the Bishop of —— ‘Opposed
  as I am to the Catholic faith, opposed, as I say I am to the Catholic
  faith...’ on which a priest from the body of the meeting, —‘Which
  faith except..., etc.’”

Footnote 13:

  It was an interesting and typical stage in the development of women
  when a girl found it necessary to “go into hysterics” in order to
  convince her father of her right to an education.

How she always did delight in a good story! The most strenuous passages
of the diary are interspersed with pages of jokes, riddles, anagrams,
_bon-mots_, some very good, some as she herself admits on reflection,
very indifferent. She used to say that a sense of humour had been her
salvation,—that, but for that, she never could have got through the many
struggles of her life.

And one is glad to think how often that sense of humour must have come
to relieve the intensity of that first conscious struggle for freedom,
when she herself felt that in venturing forward she was renouncing a
good deal,—that the life before her was an uncharted sea.

  “Worst thing about Queen’s College is—no Sarah till Christmas,” she
  writes. “M. brought me an invite to write for the Sunday School
  Quarterly. Sat up till 2 a.m. Friday to write story on 18th after
  Trinity. I wonder if I shall succeed, and, if so, how compatible with
  Queen’s?

  Sept. 25th. All settled for Queen’s. Mrs. Williams writes very
  kindly.... Having rather hard work with Redknap, five lessons a week.
  Must try for 2nd class in Mathematics, and, if I can, for more.

  Absurd panic at Dunham lest I should be a ‘governess’! Awful phantom!”

It is difficult for girl students of the present day to imagine all that
was meant by the opening of Queen’s College in 1858. The plan of
establishing a college for women had been much discussed by Alfred
Tennyson, Charles Kingsley, and others; and the work had been warmly
taken up by Frederick Denison Maurice, E. H. Plumptre (afterwards Dean
of Wells) and R. C. Trench (afterwards Archbishop of Dublin), all three
of whom were represented on the teaching staff.[14] We may imagine what
it meant for S. J.-B. to pass from the hands of the average
schoolmistress of that day to teachers such as these.

Footnote 14:

  See Mrs. Alec Tweedie’s interesting record of “The First College for
  Women.”

On the 5th October she settled down to work, and three days later she
writes:

  “Very delicious it is to be here. ‘Oh, if there be an Elysium on
  earth, it is this, it is this!’ I am inclined to say. I am as happy as
  a queen. Work and independence! What can be more charming? Really
  perfection. So delicious in the present, what will it be to look back
  upon?”

She was “fay” that night, as they say in Scotland: it was scarcely lucky
to be so happy. She little guessed, poor child, “what it would be to
look back upon” her life at Queen’s. Much happiness she got from that
life, no doubt,—a rich harvest of education, contact with interesting
temperaments and able minds, friendships that were only broken by death.
But there are some people endowed for better or worse, with the gift of
taking what seem to be the side-issues of life far too intensely, of
living half-a-dozen lives in addition to the one they have definitely
chosen, of wringing out of an average human lot an amount of joy, of
experience and of suffering that to their companions would seem simply
incredible. And S. J.-B. was essentially one of these. Incidentally in
the course of the day’s work she would develop fresh interests, make
unusual friendships, perhaps even incur resentments that might well have
demanded her whole strength and energy; and all these threads had to be
carried on in addition to the recognized work of her life.

That the recognized work was in itself no sinecure may be gathered from
her report for the Michaelmas term. She has “good,” sometimes “very
good” reports in all her seven classes,—four of them being signed by F.
D. Maurice, E. H. Plumptre and R. C. Trench. The classes were
arithmetic, geometry and algebra, English language and composition,
French, history, natural philosophy and astronomy, theology, and church
history.

She was popular with her fellow-students, and particularly so with Miss
Agnes Wodehouse (afterwards Mrs. Williams) whom she greatly admired, and
of whom she made, incidentally, as profound a study as she did of her
Euclid and history. “How few ladies there are!” she concludes. “Agnes
Wodehouse is thorough. So is my Mother. Few else.” And again in this
connection, “I believe I love women too much ever to love a man. Yet who
can tell? Well, S. J.-B., don’t get sentimental, for patience’ sake.”

Unfortunately she was not so appreciative of one of the younger women
who was more or less in authority over her. The new student meant no
harm, but she took playful liberties, and no doubt, as formerly at
school, amused the other girls by her wit and audacity. After a good
deal of sparring and chaffing, things came to an _impasse_, and it was
judged better by all concerned that S. J.-B. should seek a home for
herself elsewhere. This was not an easy matter in those days when
hostels and homes of residence for women students were unknown; and so,
to the other work of her life, was added the toil of tramping about in
search of suitable quarters.

She made a number of unfortunate ventures, sampling experiences familiar
enough to the middle-class bachelor woman of the present day, though
somewhat staggering to the well-bred mid-Victorian girl. The bankrupt
householder, the drunken landlady, the undesirable male lodger, “and
other fauna,” formed part of the things that had to be taken—and were
taken most pluckily—in the day’s work. If S. J.-B. was instrumental in
bringing ill-fortune on herself—as was not infrequently the case—she
never sat down and howled,—she never even thought of giving in: she
simply put her shoulder to the wheel and went on with what she had been
doing. And so it was now, under very difficult conditions, for, once and
again, hopes were raised, hopes were dashed, and the weary struggle
began afresh,—with many bad headaches and occasional sore throats to
complicate matters.

“Quite an experience of troubles,” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake, “as much as if
you had lived many years. I think no one could have acted more wisely
than you have done”: and again, “I wish I were near, yet I don’t think I
could be a real help: it is not in my way.” And the same might have been
said by many other friends. Greater drawbacks were involved then than
now in leaving one’s own social groove.

“You have behaved very sensibly through the whole trial, which has not
been a light one,” says her Father.

In her diary she writes,—

  “Mummy says it is (my boarding-house troubles, she means) quite an
  experience of life. Truly not in these alone. Many, I believe, never
  live as _much_, and _through as much_, as I have done already, in the
  whole course of life.”

Fortunately there was one house at least where she could always take
refuge, and never failed to find herself a welcome guest,—the house of
Mr. Cordery at Hampstead. Her brother had married one of the daughters,
Miss Henrietta Cordery, in June 1857, but the friendship was of much
longer standing than that, and it would be difficult to exaggerate the
comfort and support she derived from it throughout life. With Mr. James
Cordery and his sisters Emma and Bertha (now Mrs. S. R. Gardiner) in
particular she remained in intimate association, and always managed—even
after years of separation—to take up the threads again without a break.
She was always at her best in that Hampstead home, full of gaiety and
_joie de vivre_—never afraid to be her real audacious young self.

Immediately after the extract from the diary given above, she goes on
light-heartedly:

  “I am so _thoroughly_ happy in this way of life, hardly any other
  could suit me as well. So independent, yet so busy, so comfortable,
  yet not luxurious. Plenty, yet no superfluity. It is certainly _very_
  kind of the dear ‘old folks’ to let me have it so, and very wise. I
  should never, at least at present, have settled at home. I should have
  been ever longing for independence and work, and now I have all I want
  and may yet do good. Having, as Maurice would say, found my centre,
  other things will, I trust, grow up around it. I trust most fervently
  I may yet be a real comfort to my precious Mother and dear kind
  Father. As last year I computed my ‘worldly estate,’ as quaint old
  Pepys, whose diary I am reading, would say; I do it again. I have now
  for dress and private money £40 per year. Henceforth I shall have
  tutor’s money as well. From my Father I have, I think, as well as I
  can calculate, about £50 a term for all expenses, besides all paid
  when at home, as well as travelling expenses with them or anywhere
  (except while at College) and riding, etc. So in actual money I have
  about £200 a year and in money’s worth another £100. Therefore I
  conclude about £300 a year to be about the happy medium of wealth for
  a single woman. Dear generous old Father! Few would, I think, give so
  much in so good a way to their children. I believe as regards
  happiness and satisfaction never was money better, if never more
  kindly, spent. I must try to pay back the ‘labour of love,’ and
  ‘requite my parents,’ dear, dear old things! Bless them both.

  I really believe as regards money I am honestly _quite contented_. I
  wish for no more. And as this is, they say, a somewhat remarkable
  fact, I specially note it down. Yet it sounds ludicrously tempting to
  reply to myself, Contented! Shame on you if you were not, I think. Yet
  for actual pocket money, I am horribly pinched just now,—only 9s. 9d.
  till next quarter,—nearly four weeks hence.”

The reference to “tutor’s money” is interesting. She had not been two
months at College when she was asked to take the post of mathematical
tutor. The suggestion gave her great pleasure, and she broached the
subject to her parents when she next went home. Though startled, they
were on the whole pleased at the honour done her, but things assumed a
different aspect when her father realized the conditions on which the
tutorship was to be held.

The correspondence seems well worth quoting _in extenso_:

                                                         “Jan. 28th.

  DEAREST, I have only this moment heard that you contemplate being
  _paid_ for the tutorship. It would be quite beneath you, darling, and
  I _cannot consent_ to it. Take the post as one of honour and
  usefulness, and I shall be glad, and _you will be no loser_, be quite
  sure. But to be _paid_ for the work would be to alter the thing
  _completely_, and would lower you sadly in the eyes of almost
  everybody. Do not think about it, dearest, and you will rejoice
  greatly by and bye with all who love you best.”

A few days later he writes again:

  “MY DEAR SOPHY,—and you are very dear to me—you have been much in my
  thoughts, and I have been grieved to know that you have had so much
  real harass, and were so _tried_ before you settled down in your
  present peaceful domicile. Now all is well, I trust, and you in peace
  and comfort, so, remembering the Appellant from Philip drunk to Philip
  sober, make the application, giving me the benefit of it, and bear
  with me, my own child, whilst I briefly tell you what I think and
  hope. I heartily admire your readiness to turn your talents to good
  account, and employ them in a way so clearly beneficial to others, but
  believe me that if you take money payment, you will make a sad
  mistake, debase your standing, and place yourself in a position that
  people in general, including many relations and friends, will never
  _as long as you live_ understand otherwise than as greatly to your
  discredit. You would be considered mean and illiberal,—tho’ I am sure
  you are neither the one or the other—accepting wages that belong to a
  class beneath you in social rank, and which (it would be said) you had
  no right, under any circumstances, to appropriate to yourself....”

The reply to this came by return of post:

                                                      “Feb. 3rd ’59.

  MY OWN DARLING DADDY,

        I got your kind old letter this morning, for which, thanks....

  Well, as to this Tutorship. I have thought about it, and about all the
  accompanying circumstances. If you will listen, I will try to tell you
  what I think. I believe I am particularly suited for teaching, my
  taste, and I fancy my talent, lies that way. I generally succeed
  pretty well in making my pupils understand what I understand myself
  and so far I suppose that proves my capability. Well, there are so
  many who make teaching their profession, who do _not_ love it, and are
  not fond of it or fit for it, that I think anything that can be done
  to raise the standard of teaching and teachers, must be good. Well,
  this would be effectually done if everyone who loved the business (and
  was therefore necessarily to a degree fit for it) undertook it, and no
  others. I think this very College is doing much to raise the standard,
  and I fancy they are particularly anxious—the authorities, I mean—to
  get teachers of a somewhat superior rank in society (as generally
  considered). Well, justly or not, I am, I believe, supposed to be of
  rather higher class than the generality of teachers, and therefore
  specially eligible. I suppose I certainly have considerable talent for
  Mathematics, if for anything. It is the one thing I know best and love
  best. Then—when the Mathematical Tutorship is vacant,—surely I am
  right enough to be anxious to obtain it. I was thought capable, and
  chosen.

  Now remember, Father dear, I am not here taking the place from anyone
  else, though if I were doing so, being myself the best fitted, I do
  not think my conscience need be troubled,—but this Tutorship has stood
  vacant for some months from sheer want of anyone capable to fill it.

  Well, the terms of the agreement are—do this work, and receive this
  payment,—the payment contingent entirely on the work. The conditions
  are, if the Tutor has four pupils, forming a college class, she
  receives 5s. an hour. It is right and natural I think, I certainly do
  work equivalent to the payment, and have fairly earned it. Why should
  I not take it? You as a man, did your work and received your payment,
  and no one thought it any degradation, but a fair exchange. Why should
  the difference of my sex alter the laws of right and honour? Tom is
  doing on a large scale what I do on a small one,—I cannot recognize
  any fundamental difference in the matter. I cannot say ‘I do not want
  this money, I have no use for it,’ for in truth, tho’ having an ample
  and generous allowance, I should have plenty of use for it. Then there
  is the honest, and I believe, perfectly justifiable pride of
  _earning_. Did you not feel this when you received your first salary?
  Why should I be deprived of it? Then again you offer to give me the
  money if I refuse to take it from the College. But this would be a
  wholly false position, to get credit for generosity in refusing what I
  yet receive. I could not do this. In that case I must say to the Dean,
  not ‘I am willing to work without payment,’ but ‘My Father prefers
  that I should receive payment from _him_, not from the College,’ and I
  think the Dean would think us both ridiculous, or at least foolish.

  If I wrote a book I should receive payment for that, and I presume
  even you would not object: why then now?

  For mental work done in the school the reward was a prize which cost
  money, you thought this honourable,—why should the reward of labour at
  College, being money, be dishonourable?

  Hitherto I have had a class of only 3, and therefore I have not been
  officially entitled to this salary. The Dean wished to make some
  arrangement for my payment last term, but I said at once,—‘The money
  is not of much consequence to me—I had rather, not having the official
  number, teach them as a friend and ex-officially,’ and so I have done.
  Here I think I was right, I could afford to teach them gratis, and I
  did so. The Dean was gratified, the pupils obliged, and I was
  satisfied. So it was last term. But if this term I get the official
  number, I do not see any reason except pride for declining the
  payment. My pupils would pay the College all the same, why should not
  the College pay me? I really do not see that I am doing anything
  either mean or dishonourable, and I hardly think you can think so
  either. I am _sure_ the College authorities do not. I do not think the
  Dean would think the better of me for declining the money, which I
  should be glad to receive, on account of a scruple of pride. Do you
  honestly, Father, think any lady lowered by the mere act of receiving
  money? Did you think the less of Mrs. Teed because you paid her? Would
  you have thought better of her for refusing payment? I am sure you
  would not. You are too much of a gentleman to attach importance to
  money.

  Of course the question of right or wrong, honour or dishonour, is the
  point. This once settled, people’s opinion is worth nothing. I should
  be glad that my friends had the sense to see clearly and rightly in
  the matter, if they have not, I regret it for their own sakes,—not for
  mine.

  Of course I am speaking of indifferent people,—not of you or my
  Mother. I care very much that _you_ should think me right.

  But even taking this lower view—of opinion—I do not believe that many
  for whom I have any regard or esteem, would ultimately think the worse
  of me for accepting well-earned wages. If I took the post, and, even
  without accepting a salary, neglected my duty, or did it not to the
  utmost of my power, I should be far more contemptible.

  Mary Jane Evans, I know, for one, and she is one of the proudest
  families of our relations, thinks me right. Miss Wodehouse, whose
  family is older and better than mine, not only says I am right, but
  showed she agreed with my opinion by her actions. She sees no meanness
  in earning, but in those that think it mean. When accepting Maurice’s
  school, she said to him, most nobly, I think, ‘If you think it better
  that I should work as a paid mistress, I will take any salary you
  please; if not, I am willing to do the work freely and for nothing.’ I
  think this more noble-minded than any proud refusal of money could
  have been.

  Well, darling Father, I have written you a very long letter, but I
  wished to tell you honestly all I thought, and I trust you don’t think
  my epistle _too_ long....

                                       Your loving child,
                                                             SOPHY.”

[Illustration:

    _Emery Walker ph. sc._

  _Thomas Jex-Blake_
  _from a drawing in chalks by H. T. Wells, R.A. 1862_
]

                                                     “4th Feb. 1859.

  DEAREST SOPHY,

        Your letter has given me unmixed pleasure....

  About the tutorship, you write very ably, but your logic and
  illustrations are not sound, as I hope to show you. I am sure you are
  fit for, as you are fond of, teaching, and the desire to raise the
  standard both of teaching and teachers is good, but your receiving or
  not receiving wages for the work, can neither help or hinder the
  matter. I agree to _all_ you say in favour of working,—it is very
  honourable, very right, and worthy of all praise, but what I object to
  is your taking money for it. It is beneath you, and you will be far
  happier to decline it, and let it flow into its proper channels, to
  fructify widely and do real good.

  The question is, as you say, one of right and wrong. In my deliberate
  judgment it is _wrong_, in your position to receive pay for what you
  do, to say nothing of the extent to which it would damage you. The
  cases you cite, darling, are not to the point. I will take each of
  them in the order you put them and then judge for yourself. I never
  received a salary of any kind in my life. I was of a liberal
  profession—a particularly honourable branch of it—and (chiefly) lived
  by it. This was ‘right’ beyond all doubt. T. W. is doing the same sort
  of thing. He feels bound as a _man_, with ability to do so, to support
  his wife and family, and his position is a high one, which can only be
  filled by a first-class man of character, and yielding him nearer two
  than one thousand a year. The third case—Mrs. Teed’s—like the others
  has no analogy whatever to my dear Sophy’s—Mrs. Teed had no _means_.
  She went out in early life as a governess to earn an honourable
  livelihood. She did earn it well and her talents, by God’s blessing,
  led to her after success, enabling her to lay by something to support
  herself and sister in their later years.

  How entirely different is my darling’s case. You want for nothing, and
  know that (humanly speaking) you will want for nothing. If you married
  tomorrow to my liking—and I don’t believe you would ever marry
  otherwise—I should give you a good fortune. What temptation is there
  for your doing that which, at best, will be misunderstood to your
  prejudice? I should say at all events wait a bit till you are a little
  older, and can form a riper judgment. My feeling is strong that you
  being a paid teacher would certainly _damage_ you, in what precise
  degree nobody can say. Do the work—it is a good work and I rejoice in
  it, but don’t put a penny into your purse for doing it. Let the gold
  go in some other direction. This will give you a greater and more
  lasting satisfaction than you could derive from any money payment.

                                Your loving Father,
                                                      T. JEX-BLAKE.”

                                                      “Feb. 5th ’59.

  DEAR DADDY,

        Thanks for your letter. I do not know whether all my reasoning
  was logical,—probably not—but I do not think that your arguments
  respecting the relative position of (at least) Tom and myself, are
  much better than ‘distinctions without differences.’ Refine it away as
  you may, Tom’s position and mine are considerably analogous, though
  very unequal. As far as I can trace the foundation of your asserted
  difference it is first his being a ‘man,’ which difference, as I said
  before, I cannot recognize as radical,—secondly, that his position can
  only be filled by ‘a first-class man,’—and I think, allowing, of
  course, for very great disparity of knowledge, acquirements and
  requirements, the comparison holds, for it is not easy, as has been
  proved by the length of time the office has been vacant, to fill this
  Tutorship properly. I should say it is the one the College finds
  hardest to fill, and therefore it is (in its degree) as creditable a
  thing to hold as the mastership.

  Then I cannot think that you mean to urge the superior lucrativeness
  of his post as any argument, for the principle must be identical in
  receiving one penny or ‘nearer two than one thousand a year.’ Then I
  cannot say that I want for nothing,—I do want the money, and am quite
  satisfied to earn it, quite knowing that my allowance is enough. I do
  not really _see_ that I am in any degree wrong, if I am it is
  unconsciously and honestly.

  Well, I don’t think it is of much use to argue any more—I have told
  you honestly what I think.... Thank you anyhow for listening to me
  patiently and answering me. I do not like to vex you after all this—
  you have been and are very good to me. You ask me to wait a little
  while and consider. I have considered well, and I do not believe any
  further thought would alter my opinion. However I will promise you for
  this term only (not ceding the principle) not to take any fees, but if
  they come (which I do not yet know) to return them as a free gift to
  the College. If at the end of this term I still hold my opinion, I
  trust you not to oppose my determination again. Remember and
  understand, Daddy, I do promise this simply and only because you wish
  it, and not because in the least degree my mind is one whit altered on
  the point. I trust you to meet me half way, and not be in any degree
  grieved if I resume my intention next term.

                        Goodbye darling,
                                    Ever your loving child,
                                                             SOPHY.”

                                     “Saturday night. Feb. 5th 1859.

  DEAREST,

        ... Tom’s being a _man_ makes _all_ the difference, he has just
  taken the _plain path of duty_. I am very pleased with the spirit in
  which you write, darling, but I must be sincere, which I should not be
  if I told you that I had the shadow of a doubt that you ought not to
  be a _paid_ teacher....

                             Ever, dearest,
                                     Your affect. Father,
                                                      T. JEX-BLAKE.”

So closes this delightful correspondence. It was not to be supposed that
she should have no regrets. In her diary she says:

  “Feb. 13th.... Like a fool I have consented to give up the fees for
  this term only—though I am miserably poor. I am sorry. It was foolish.
  It only defers the struggle.”

The Norfolk cousins were not a little impressed by the new life S. J.-B.
was making for herself, though it was not to be expected that they
should all take so enlightened a view of it as Miss Evans did.

  “You seem,” writes Cousin Ellie, “to be spending rather a jolly time
  of it, but still it seems to me rather queer that a lot of girls
  should walk about London when and where they please. I don’t think you
  would come to any harm, but I am sure there are many that would.”

And Sarah with whom “one does not connect the idea of angel,”

  “What glorious fun a girl might have if inclined, but you are as
  steady as a rock. No fear of my dear old man doing anything giddy. My
  dearest treasure, Goodnight.”

We gather from subsequent correspondence that the frivolity of this
letter brought down a very severe reprimand from its recipient.

Elinor was the first to pay a visit to the unknown world, and she writes
a long account of it to the eager Sarah:

  “When I first saw her that evening, I thought she did not look so
  well, but since then I think the contrary—She is much thinner, but in
  such good spirits, and so happy. I think she quite likes everyone to
  know that she has been made mathematical tutor, for it is considered a
  great honour.”

S. J.-B. would fain have seen more of these delightful cousins, but
their father held strict views as to the conditions under which well-
born girls might visit London.

  “As to Ellie and Sarah,” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake in one of the severe
  moods that had become so rare, “instead of being hurt they do not
  accede to all you ask, you might well be proud of their _warm_ love.
  You have taken yourself out of your natural position, and you cannot
  understand the need for their conforming to the proprieties their
  Father so naturally and properly expects. Good-looking girls do not
  needlessly go about London without chaperons. Happily for them, their
  Father’s wish is sufficient to guide them. There is a respect and duty
  to the position, however weak and inferior you may judge a Parent to
  be.[15] Well, darling, God bless and comfort you.”

Footnote 15:

  The reference is not to S. J.-B.’s own parents.

Yet, judged by present-day standards, S. J.-B. would not have been
considered deficient in the spirit of compromise. Her letters to her
Father on the subject of tutor’s fees is evidence enough on that score,
and those letters are in no way at variance with her whole attitude.

  “A triumph as to _life_!” she records in her diary. “Last Monday told
  Mummy of my not going to the Opera without telling her, but proclaimed
  my intention in the future. No interdiction. So I talked a little
  about it to make all my ground sure, and coming back on Tuesday found
  them going to Macbeth, Friday, and yesterday told Mummy as a matter of
  course. She acquiesced if not consented, and was glad we had so nice a
  party and hoped I shall not go _often_, so entirely removing all
  interdiction....

  Well, as to the Theatre! I believe I must confess myself disappointed.
  Charles Kean as Macbeth did not satisfy me. Mrs. C. Kean very good (I
  suppose) as Lady Macbeth. Yet not _real_, as Shakespeare surely should
  be. After the murder of Duncan was perhaps the grandest, most awful,
  most real.... The scene where Macduff learns his loss more _real_ than
  most. The fighting at the end ludicrous.... I thought there would be
  decent fencing.”

A few months later she went (with Miss Wodehouse) to a ritualistic
church, and was moved to hot indignation.

  “How can this man wear a priestly robe in the Church, and subscribe to
  her 6th and 20th most scriptural articles? Well, indeed, might we pray
  for the state of the Church Militant, when within her walls are such
  teachers.

  Yet was I right in not staying the sacrament because this sermon so
  stirred my indignation? ‘The unworthiness of ministers hinders not the
  effect of the Sacrament.’ Perhaps I was wrong. Yet I could not have
  stayed in a peaceful or holy mind.

  To the law and to the testimony! How precious is such unanswerable
  decree!—so final a court of appeal!”

A note is inserted in the margin,—(“This May 1859. Sic transit! Feb. 11,
1865!”).

Meanwhile her certificate examination was drawing near, and mathematics
absorbed most of her thoughts. On July 1st she writes:

  “Certificate examination nearly 4 hours. Out of 23 problems did 20½.
  So I trust I am pretty safe. I did get rather frightened as the time
  drew on, but really have worked hard and I trust won. Sent a telegram,
  ‘Success’ to Mother, though the declaration is not yet made.

  July 28th. My certificate won triumphantly and marked, ‘with great
  credit’.”

Of course she was working too hard.

  “I have a great deal of work in College,” she confesses some time
  later. I take 8 classes,—English Literature, English History, Mental
  and Moral Philosophy, Theology, Church History, Algebra, Geometry, and
  German Conversation; and have 7 pupils. I am afraid it is too much
  altogether.”

And what about the ordinary traditional preoccupations and vanities of a
young girl’s life in the midst of these manifold interests and claims?—
what about thoughts of dress, of personal appearance, of love and
marriage? Well, obviously there was little room left for any of these.
S. J.-B. was under the impression that she cared a good deal about
dress, and she would not have been flattered if anyone had expressed a
different opinion. As a matter of fact she never had time to give the
subject much more than a passing thought, and the poor little remnant of
an allowance that remained when more pressing claims and numerous little
charities had been met, was barely sufficient to pay for the work of an
ordinary seamstress. The adaptable coat and skirt, and the endless
variety of cheap ready-made dress had not then come to the aid of the
educated working-girl, and S. J.-B. did not realize the difficulty of
the problem she had to tackle.

  “I should like to see your muslin at 3s. 6d. before I got one,” writes
  honest Ellie. “You know you are the last person in the world I should
  copy in dress, or who I would trust to get one for me, for it is the
  only thing almost you _know nothing_ about, and you have very
  peculiar, and, I think, generally bad taste.”

The letter may have been written in a moment of irritation about
something else, or indeed about this very subject of dress, for young
folks are sensitive as to the appearance of their valued friends; but it
certainly contained more than a germ of truth. Fortunately youth and a
radiant personality cover a multitude of shortcomings in this respect,
and contemporary correspondence often points to the extent to which the
Almighty had “favoured” S. J.-B. “in person as well as in mind.” In this
connection there is an interesting letter of this period from an old
schoolfellow, the daughter of a former schoolmistress. After a graphic
account of a lecture by Thackeray, at which the writer had the good
fortune to be present, she says:

  “In face Thackeray is the image of—whom, do you think? Guess. Someone
  you know,—of _yourself_. Yes, indeed, of you, Sophy Blake. Mama and I
  were both struck, almost startled, by the resemblance.”

It happened by a curious coincidence some years later that Laurence was
taking S. J.-B.’s portrait not very long after he had taken Thackeray’s,
and he expressed himself as greatly struck by the similarity of the
lines in the two faces. S. J.-B.’s magnificent, speaking brown eyes,
however, were hers alone. “If they were taken out and laid on a plate,”
said a forcible young friend, “they would still be beautiful!”

As regards love and marriage, one can only say that, for a girl in the
middle of the last century she thought of them surprisingly little. She
speaks occasionally of her own marriage as if it were as much a matter
of course as her coming of age, and, after enjoying some pleasant boy-
and-girl intercourse with an unknown “H.” at the house of her cousins,
she describes him as “the sort of man I may probably marry in the end.”
Visiting a newly-married girl cousin, she frankly admits the charm of
the comradeship, for indeed, as a friend said of her (with more truth
than elegance of diction) a few years later than the point we have
reached: “You have taken on you a hard, hard vocation from your youngest
days,—and yet it is scarcely so hard for anyone in the world to stand
alone.”

In any case S. J.-B. went straight on her course, like many of the
finest girls of our own day, without giving any thought to cross
currents that might alter the course of her life. And indeed her daily
life was absorbing enough. It is scarcely surprising if, among her many
interests, her religious life was somewhat smothered for the time, or
that, at least she thought so.

  “Mrs. Thornton called my doing what I had done ‘noble’. Yes, if for
  _His_ sake, but, alas, much more—altogether—for my own. Yet my loving
  the work is no disqualification for doing it for Him. I trust I do do
  good a little. Surely honest intellectual help is something, if of
  lower class.... I have thought—I cannot take more work, Sunday School,
  etc., but what I do is _good_ in its degree; if done in His name,
  surely He will accept it.”

More and more, as she looked back on her own school life from the
vantage-ground of a year at Queen’s College, she felt how much the
education of girls might be improved. On the last night of the year she
writes:

  “In this year my idea of work in the cause of education has developed
  itself into that of a resident College of the Holy Trinity. Heaven
  knows if ever to be carried out. If good,—yes, doubtless,—if not, God
  will raise up better. Little ‘religious’ as I fear I am, I do feel
  this thoroughly....

                   ‘And may the New Year cherish
                   All the hopes that now are bright.’

  Such a happy loving Goodnight to and from Daddy and Mummy. Very happy
  I am tonight.

                   ‘And once more ere thou perish,
                   Old Year, Good night! Good night!’”




                              CHAPTER VII
                               FRIENDSHIP


The great remain children to the last, and in this respect S. J.-B. was
essentially one of the great. To the end of her life, for those who knew
her well, she could be a delightful child. But it was about the time we
are considering—the age of 20 to 21—that she may be said to have become
a woman, or, more truly, to have put on her manhood. She was too busy at
the time to describe or analyze in her diary the change that was taking
place—“Oh,” she says, “the little space of time and paper! The mighty
space of events ‘unheard’!”—she was in no way self-conscious about it;
but there are indications, like straws on the surface of the water, that
show in what direction the current was setting. One sees that she was
beginning to look at life freshly and at first hand, that the old
traditional dogmatism was falling away from her views of religion, of
social questions, of the relation between the sexes. To be sure this old
husk was being replaced by the even more acrid dogmatism of youth; but
in that very acridity one feels the promise of growth, of the ripe
wisdom of later years.

As far back as March 1859 one finds the following significant passage:

  “Had a long argument with Miss Wodehouse today. Two points chiefly. 1.
  Are evil deeds, though always pernicious to the doer, sometimes
  beneficial to mankind? I affirming: she denying. 2. Is it our first
  duty to seek our own salvation? She denying.

  I cannot tell why I am so unable to argue with her. She seems to get
  me into a maze. Yet I think she argues honestly. I sometimes shrink
  from ‘sacred’ subjects with her, yet she considers all equally sacred.

  ‘What is truth’ indeed? Yet am I not somewhat like ‘jesting Pilate’
  who ‘would not stay for an answer’?”

“What is truth?” one finds her asking again and again, and she at least
had one grand qualification for the search,—the habit of treating truth
with respect even in its humblest fragments.

Her Father, of course, was uneasy about her.

  “_I should like to see you much_,” he writes, “but I feel that Sunday
  would be a heavy day for you here (as I don’t frequent popish mass
  houses or the like), so that if you could run down here on Monday
  evening....”

And again:

  “When I think of the (at best) half teaching you have, but that I
  confide in our gracious covenant head, I should tremble for you when I
  am gone. I have no doubt at all that Maurice is a most amiable man,
  but I believe that to this hour he has never come clear out of
  Unitarianism, and therefore does not see distinctly, nor, of course,
  teach scripturally, any one of those fundamental Christian truths (all
  connected together) original sin, Christ’s vicarious work atoning for
  sin and fulfiling the law, justification by faith, and salvation by
  grace. Read, darling, ...”

The following “passage of arms” with a Norfolk cousin, a man some years
older than herself, is interesting in this connection:

                                             “Hastings, March 12/60.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        I left Brighton on Friday with something of a heavy heart. I saw
  I had grieved you where I had really no intention of doing so: that
  was painful to me and I must regret it. I express to you my strong
  regrets. But oh! tenthousandfold deeper was the sad conviction _forced
  upon me_, that the advance you have made,—shall I vex you if I say
  honestly and openly,—_Romewards_, since I last saw you was very great.
  I believe you are as yet unconscious of your own tendency. I told you
  so at Lyng. But in honesty I must tell you, my dear Sophy, I tremble
  for you. It is such _awfully slippery_ ground. It is such a _pleasant_
  accommodation of religion to our fallen nature. It so feeds our
  _impulsiveness_ and fortifies our _natural religionism_.

  Will you forgive me if, with a cousin’s, I hope more than that,
  anxious love I _beseech_ you to ‘consider your ways,’ and _bring your
  soul before God in this matter_. Pray don’t _starve your soul on
  gilded husks_ while bread lies at your feet in your Father’s house.

  I know more than one amiable creature who began _as you have done_,
  and has landed in Rome....

  Dear Sophy, don’t trust your _head_, much less your heart, much less
  any fallen man or imperfect church under the sun. Trust Jesus, Jesus
  only, Jesus _wholly_, Jesus _exclusively_.

  I trust this note will not make you wrath against me.... Be sure of
  one thing, I banter no more, where feeling is evidently so deep.
  Henceforth I will try and pray fervently for your poor soul’s
  conversion to God.”

                                                    “March 14th./60.

  MY DEAR ...

        If I do not say that you have written me a most ridiculous
  letter, it will be more from respect to its motive than its matter,—or
  purport. I know people can work themselves up to any exaggerated view
  of things, yet I can hardly believe that, if you have half the sense
  people say you have, you can on sober reconsideration really believe
  that there was the smallest ground for your tirade in my objection to
  hear a Church—a house of God at least, spoken of and criticised as if
  it were a right thing to visit it as you would a theatre, and remain a
  looker-on while others were worshipping. ‘Seeking occasion against’
  men was not the characteristic of the followers of the Jesus whose
  name you reiterate so often. I believe this was the whole feeling with
  which I spoke, exactly as I should have done if it had been a Baptist
  Meeting-house you were commenting on,—as I believe you would _not_
  have commented on a Baptist Meeting-house.

  You may, if you please, take my word for it that I am _not_ going over
  to Rome, among whose partisans, however, I must say that I have never—
  no, nor I think from any other denomination under the sun—heard the
  same virulent abuse of those who have at least ‘one Lord,’ if not ‘one
  faith and one baptism,’—that I have from the Puritan portion of our
  own Church: and I am sure no God and no Church was ever served by the
  one or the other....

  What I have written is probably ill conceived and worse expressed.
  Excuse all such deficiencies. If I have myself fallen into the error I
  protest against, I need more than excuse—forgiveness. I have not meant
  to be violent or uncourteous, but where I have felt strongly, I doubt
  not I have so spoken.

  For your cousinly care and affection I thank you heartily, as I am
  ever

                      Your affectionate cousin,
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

And not only in matters of thought and principle was she developing; she
was beginning, too, to take her full share of responsibility as regards
her fellow-creatures, entering into the meaning of brotherhood and
citizenship. In addition to her work at Queen’s College, she undertook
to teach bookkeeping gratuitously in connection with the Society for the
Employment of Women, and had a class of children at Great Ormond Street.
“I don’t know how I should like _her_,” said a candid critic, “but it is
a pleasure to see anyone do anything so well as she does teach.”

Reference was made in a former chapter to her faculty for taking the
side-issues of life too intensely. It may not be right to look on
friendship as a side-issue—though many of the world’s workers are more
or less forced so to regard it: in any case it is scarcely too much to
say that—even when one takes into account the endless philanthropic
interests and activities of her later years—friendship constituted for
S. J.-B. the main work of life. If she had been paid for the sheer hard
work she did simply as a friend, she would have been a very rich woman.
She was always giving out, and from this time forward, she acted on the
maxim, “_Bis dat qui cito dat_.” If she arrived home, dead-tired, to
find a letter asking immediate advice or help, she would answer the
letter then and there and carry her answer to the post. If a friend was
passing through London, or coming to spend a few hours with her, she
would piece out a laborious journey by bus between her classes to meet
that friend at some far-off station and make things easy for her. If a
fellow-student or a teacher seemed on the point of breaking down, S. J.-
B. would write three or four letters and call on half-a-dozen people to
arrange for a holiday, and, if necessary, for a substitute. “Then home
very tired,” she writes to her Mother after such an experience, “but
very content to write this account to you.” (As not infrequently
happened, the invalid had found a refuge at 13 Sussex Square, and Mrs.
Jex-Blake’s kind heart was set on an extension of the holiday.)

  “I do not think I ever did so good a Lord’s Day work in my life,—if,
  that is, it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath Day,—to save life, not
  to kill,—or let kill. I think I am very like a life-boat,—valueless in
  itself, yet useful enough in saving better things alive. That, indeed,
  its whole use and work.”

  “I am sure all that driving and running about with me on Thursday made
  your eye and headache much worse,” writes Cousin Sarah, “but you are
  such a dear kind old pet,—would half kill yourself for anybody.”

A former school friend writes at the same date:

  “I feel I ought not to trouble you, occupied as you are, but, whenever
  I have asked you for anything, your kindness and sympathy have been so
  readily given that I always think of you when I hear of _any wants_.”

  “Mama sends her very best love,” writes Miss M. J. Evans, “and Papa
  too. Oddly enough, both like you. How can they?—such a trumpery
  _heartless_ girl!”

And one comes upon hundreds of tributes to the same effect.

Sometimes S. J.-B.’s willing assistance was of a kind that involved no
small labour and anxiety. If a friend was shy and gifted and poor,
capable of producing work not yet recognized as marketable, S. J.-B. was
always ready to be the middleman. She would write round to well-to-do
friends enlisting their interest, do up samples of the work for
inspection, and (most serious of all!) undertake the responsibility of
receiving the samples safe back again. “Put the responsibility on me,”
she used to say cheerily in after life, “my shoulders are broad enough”;
and there is no doubt she began to say this—if not in so many words—
before the age of 20. People got into the way of trusting her to _see a
thing through_, of assuming that it was her _métier_ to be competent and
to organize, of leaving to her the heavy end of the stick: and no doubt
she enjoyed it all and learned much from it, though, when taken in
addition to her regular work, it was terribly hard on her hasty temper
and “irritable brain.”

“You must be very thankful to be a medium of helping so many,” writes
her Mother,—“a great honour, I consider it, pleasure without alloy.” But
in the same letter she says, “Sad, sad weather for you to knock about
in. Darling, don’t risk your health.”

  “I would not and could not speak” (after parting from you), writes
  Ellie. “I wish I was not such a silly fool, but I could not help it
  and never can, if I have to leave you.... I wonder if you have wished
  for me, if it was only to scold and fight with; but what I wish most
  of all is that you would give up fighting. I would do anything for you
  if I could only make even a slight alteration.... I do with all my
  heart wish that you would try to keep in that temper of yours.”

Noble Ellie!—“Walks upright beside me, a companion, a guide, and gives
me a hand.”

S. J.-B. rarely, if ever, expected her friends to do her the same kind
of service; but, if they became very dear, she did demand—more or less
unconsciously to herself—a definite _quid pro quo_. In her big masterful
way she would proceed to absorb their lives into her own; to establish a
subtle growing claim that was not easy to resist. She was splendidly
loyal herself, and the loyalty she exacted in return, though at first
glance an easier thing, involved more than she was in any degree aware
of. As life went on people found it increasingly difficult to disagree
with her: many simply ran away—_se sauvaient_, as the French say; and
yet it was only when in the last resort one resisted her to the face for
conscience sake in some matter very dear to her heart,—that one really
gauged the greatness of her nature.

All this is taking us somewhat ahead of the early friendships at
Queen’s, but the frank recognition of this aspect of her character is
essential to an adequate understanding of her life even in those days. A
Queen’s College friend who, in the most admirable and magnanimous spirit
had accepted what might be reckoned a heavy obligation to S. J.-B. and
her Father, writes as follows:

  “I wish to tell you (I could not before, but think it right now) that
  this ... will be more of a personal advantage and enjoyment to me than
  anything else in the world....

  With all my heart I rejoice to acknowledge an _immense_ obligation to
  you for your love to me at all times and for this particular way of
  showing it, but _not_ that sort of obligation which shall in any way
  affect my words and doings with you for the future.”

If friendships are to be weighed, not counted, S. J.-B. was, even at
this period, fortunate in her possession of them. The Norfolk cousins,
the Cordery family, Miss Wodehouse, Miss Ada Benson, Miss Lucy Walker
(afterwards Mrs. Unwin) who was her junior at Queen’s, Miss Martha
Heaton (Mrs. Hilhouse) a fellow teacher,—are the names that occur to one
most readily. And at this time there came into her life a friendship
that was destined to make a deeper impression on her than any of these,—
the deepest impression, in fact, of any in the whole of her life.

This is how it began:

  “Jan. 26th. 1860. Just had a lesson in book-keeping from Miss
  [Octavia] Hill. Clever, pleasant girl,—much nicer than I thought.
  Dined with me. What and how the deuce am I to pay her? £1 1s., I
  suppose. Dear old Patty Heaton! How fond I am of her, and what
  wonderfully good friends we are!”

  “Jan. 27th. I am sure I am a good companion for her (Miss Heaton) if
  only in amusing her. I think laughing does her a deal of good—hearty
  fun. I rejoice in her exceedingly. And I hope for another sort of
  friend, or ally at least, in Miss Hill who came and taught me book-
  keeping yesterday evening. Nice, sensible, clever. Very good worker, I
  expect.”

In the published _Life_ of Miss Octavia Hill, one cannot but observe how
good this dawning friendship was for her also, how beneficient was the
sunshine that it brought into her somewhat grey young life. On Feb. 5th,
1860, she writes to her sister:

  “I am always thinking of you both, and longing to have you home again
  that you may really know all our doings and lives. Mine lately you
  would assuredly consider rather of the dissipated kind. I have been
  giving some book-keeping lessons to Miss J.-B. She is a bright,
  spirited, brave, generous young lady, living alone, in true bachelor
  style. It took me three nights to teach her, and she begged me to come
  to dinner each time. She has a friend who is killing herself by hard
  work to support her younger sisters. I gather she would gladly give
  her friend help, for she speaks most sadly of the ‘modern fallacy’
  ‘that the money must be earned.’ She thinks it might be given when
  people are dear friends: she says they’ve given the most precious
  thing and what difference can a little money make?”[16]

Footnote 16:

  _Life of Octavia Hill._

Almost from the first Miss Hill’s letters to S. J.-B. took a serious
tone. On March 18th she writes:

  “I wonder whether you will think me very impertinent if I say that I
  wonder you don’t see that, in turning away from so many important
  thoughts with a half joke, you are refusing God’s means of grace as
  much as in staying away from ordained services. It is no good my
  writing sermons, however.... I trust to live to see some one or some
  sorrow do for you what I cannot, to see such a peace as ‘passeth all
  understanding’ come over you, to see the thankful, perfect dedication
  of all your powers to His service for His sake....

  I too long for a nice quiet talk with you. I enjoy it so, and your
  magnificent energy does me such good.”

The talks were not always quiet. There are those still living who
remember some animated discussions, for the two girls had stepped, as it
were, out of totally different worlds. Here is a typical passage:

  S. J.-B. (hotly), “_I_ never heard the game laws attacked!”

  O. H. (calmly), “_I_ never heard them defended!”

In the Easter holidays of that year both Miss Heaton and Miss Hill were
guests at 13 Sussex Square, and the friendship between the latter and S.
J.-B. was greatly deepened.

  “My dear loving strong child,” writes S. J.-B. in her diary after this
  visit. “I do love and reverence her.... Had a loving solemn letter
  (not altogether pleasing to me) on my telling her we had had a ‘row’
  [at home]. Told her by return ‘Hang you,’ and bade her remember she
  was neither nurse nor parson.

  Dear, dear child, though. Mother calls it beautiful letter.”

It was so characteristic of S. J.-B. to show that letter to her Mother!

On April 29th Miss Octavia Hill writes again to her sister:

  “You dear old thing, I wish I had you here to give you a good rest and
  rousing, and refreshing. I am as merry as a grig.... Miss J.-B. and I
  are always doing things together—great companions I am with her. You
  know she’s teaching me Euclid. We went to see Holman Hunt’s
  picture,...”[17]

Footnote 17:

  _Life of Octavia Hill._

And again we quote from S. J.-B.’s diary:

  “May 17th, Whitsunday. A most delicious day at Hurst with Ruth[18] and
  Octa. Went down together second-class by 6 train.... Told Octa about
  Wales,—sitting in her room on the table, my heart beating like a
  hammer. That Carry wanted to go to Wales and I too, and most
  convenient about beginning of July, so ... ‘Put off my visit?’ said
  Octa. ‘No, I was going to say (slowly) if you wish to see anything of
  me, you must come too, I think, and not put off the mountains till
  heaven.’ She sunk her head on my lap silently, raised it in tears, and
  then such a kiss!”

Footnote 18:

  Miss Heaton.

There is a happy letter about this Welsh tour:

                                            “Bettws-Y-Coed,
                                                       July 26th/60.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        We have decided rather in a hurry as there are to be no prizes,
  ... to give a treat to all, which, however, Mr. Jones specially
  stipulates is not to be a _school treat_.... It is just coming off
  today. I ordered 60 lbs. of dough and etcs. from Catherine Owen,—
  rather less rich than last year (that is, fewer eggs and less butter).
  It makes 88 lbs. altogether. But it was only settled on Monday, and as
  this is Thursday I am half afraid all may not know. But we have tried
  hard to send scouts everywhere....

  Please tell me as early as possible where you will be each day of the
  week beginning Sunday, August the 12th. Now don’t let Tom just prevent
  your remembering or caring[19] to meet your little one. I do long to
  see you so....

Footnote 19:

    By the charm of his personality, she means, of course; not by
    design.

  _Weymouth St. July 30th._ All over, darling, now, and such a happy
  time without a single blot I never remember in my life. Every thing
  has been better than any anticipation of it. We have done everything
  we wanted to do. We have been everywhere and have had no mischance, no
  annoyance of any kind. Octa looks five years younger, and as bright as
  a sunbeam. And I am in so thoroughly happy a state of mind as hardly
  to know myself. I really almost think I should be good-tempered now.
  We came home by Llangollen on Saturday, 40 miles coach and 194 miles
  rail. Not a bad journey for one day. We went up that morning to your
  high mound. The view was glorious. I took poor old Ellen Jones some
  squills for her cough, but she looks very ill indeed. She sent so very
  much love to you, and wished she had something to send you.

  The treat came off excellently on Thursday. It was grand fun to see
  Octa playing with the children. At Hunt the Slipper once, she,
  pretending she had the shoe, held up her boot toe, saying, ‘See, here
  it is,’ or something like it. Grace Owen, who was seeking, seized hold
  of it as quick as light, crying ‘Let me have it then,’ pulled away,
  and capsized Octa entirely amid roars of laughing. Octa sprang up and
  chased her round and round the field till she caught and tickled her.
  It was quite one of the bits of fun of the evening.... The only
  _contretemps_ was that poor little Hannah fell down and sprained her
  arm. However, Miss Hill’s surgical powers came in grandly, and I do
  not suppose Hannah is any the worse except for a few days inaction.
  Well, how strange it is to find this all over, and probably never to
  return. I cannot say I am glad our tour is over, for I do believe I
  was never so happy for so long in my whole life, but neither can I say
  I am sorry to see dear old London again,—I am sure I could come back
  to no other place—as a place—with near so much pleasure....

  Just fancy Octavia’s energy,—after that tremendous journey not
  reaching home till 10.30, she was off to Lincoln’s Inn at 7 a.m. the
  next morning for the early communion, and went again, and I with her
  in the afternoon. Her Mother and sister were so delighted with her
  account of all her doings, and a glorious one she gave certainly. I
  had tea with them last night. Goodbye, my darling, for the present.
  Not so very long now, I trust, before we meet.

  Aug. 1st. Although this has been in a ‘Milan’ envelope all this time,
  I suppose I must now send it to Chamounix, as I foolishly forgot to
  post it yesterday.

  Today quite forgotten to order any dinner, so just bought some cheese
  and strawberries.

  Tell Carry John Davis has sent her a letter to complain of me, which
  was forwarded to me, and which I have answered. Goodbye darling.

                               Yours lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

In August, when S. J.-B. and Miss Heaton were abroad together, Miss Hill
writes:

  “London feels strangely desolate, the lamps looked as they used to
  look, pitiless and unending as I walked home last night, and knew I
  could not go to you.... I don’t the least suppose you’ll go to
  Florence or see my sisters, but, if you should, pray take off your
  ‘spikes’ and remember ... how much they love England, and everyone who
  is a friend of ours. I look forward to bright long days in which I
  shall learn always more about you, and watch with unending and
  unfathomable love and sympathy your upward growth, and we may look
  back together on our lives, as I do often on my own, and wonder how I
  could know and see so little, and wonder more how, knowing so little,
  I should be led continually to deeper truth.”

Here, one would have said, was the beginning of an ideal friendship, and
so it might have proved—allowing, of course, for the necessary rubs
between two such strong natures—had the two girls been alone in the
world. But each of the two belonged to a family that in different ways
exacted a great deal from each of its members, and particularly of the
member involved in the present friendship. It is doubtful whether even
the two girls could have made a success of _living_ together, for the
diary refers occasionally to “cataracts and breaks,” and on both sides
there are letters of penitence for hot temper or “coldness and pride.”
Moreover, Miss Hill loved peace more than do most, and, dearly as she
loved S. J.-B., she was almost bound in time to find her “more
stimulating than quotidian,” to quote a quaint phrase of Carlyle’s.

It is therefore with no small sinking of heart that one reads the
following entry in S. J.-B.’s diary:

  “Sept. 9th. Sunday [1860]. A plan on foot of my taking part of a house
  with the Hills and having Alice for a servant. That would be very
  jolly. But rents high about here,—least £120.”

Certainly a similar sinking of heart took possession of Mr. and Mrs.
Jex-Blake, and when they learned that the finding of a tenant for the
drawing-room floor was an essential part of the scheme, it is not
surprising that—short of stopping their daughter’s allowance which had
been increased some time before—they did everything in their power to
discourage the arrangement. They were well aware that, here as
everywhere, the willing shoulders would take their full share of work
and responsibility. The reader will be prepared for Mr. Jex-Blake’s
point of view:

  “DEAREST CHILD,

        You cannot surely mean to take a house and let lodgings in
  direct opposition to your dear Mother and me. It would be quite
  disgraceful and we never can consent to it. I will not believe, my
  dear child, with all our love for you, that you will so directly
  disobey us, or that Miss Hill, knowing our feelings on the subject,
  can be a party to it.

  When you spoke of the other house, you said a lawyer was to look over
  the lease, and take care of the Hills, and I firmly believed, till the
  last few days, that you were to hire rooms. I had no more idea of your
  becoming a lodging-house keeper than of your keeping a shop. You
  cannot suppose that I would assist Miss Hill in such an exceedingly
  blameable transaction. I would _with real pleasure_ assist her in all
  possible ways ... but no Father or Mother who love their daughter, in
  your position, could consent to her joining in it. I trust, dearest
  child, you will give up all idea of such a thing, which, once done,
  you would repent as long as you lived.”

The response to this protest has not been preserved. On October 18th
Miss Hill writes:

  “MY DARLING CHILD,

        Thanks for all the trouble that you are taking about the houses,
  I am quite ashamed it should all fall to your share. Is Harley Street
  house quite out of the question? I received a letter from Mama,
  earnestly desiring that we should keep near the park; she would not at
  all like Bentinck Street. Don’t weary yourself with searching. I
  certainly will return on Thursday (probably much before) then we will
  look together again.... If it would secure the Harley Street house by
  all means let us pay all the taxes whatever they may be. I am writing
  in the dark. Goodbye, my own darling treasure.

                        I am,
                                  Yours affectionately,
                                                       OCTAVIA HILL.

  Mama has an affection now for Harley Street.”

Finally, the house 14 Nottingham Place was taken, and rather more than
the customary number of difficulties had to be worked through in
connection with it. In addition to this, illness broke out in the house,
and there were several invalids to be nursed.

The most forgiving of mothers writes after a visit to her daughter:

  “It is all your own choice and doubtless right, but it sometimes
  grieves me to think how many discomforts you have, and how many
  indulgences I have—only it is not my doing that you have them not. I
  wish I did not think of you as worn and fagged. Do assure me that you
  go to bed as early as you can and get good rest.”

Fortunately youth and friendship make all things easy, or at least
bearable. During S. J.-B.’s brief absence in December Miss Hill writes:

  “Oh, child, your letters are such a delight, but I miss you so
  dreadfully. I wander like a lost thing about the house and long for
  you intensely. Every place seems so desolate. Every witness of your
  thought and active care of and for me contrasted vividly with Z’s odd
  procrastination till I almost felt unjust and unkind. And yet I ought
  to glory in your kindness and goodness, and in all that mighty and
  glorious energy that _will_ help so many people in this sad world, if
  it is spared to us. Your room, the fire, the thought of all you had
  told me to provide for myself, fills my eyes with tears. I mean to
  spend a very quiet and happy Sunday.” And again, later,—“Do you know I
  get on very much more easily with strangers than I used, all of which
  I owe to you. It is a great satisfaction to me: it pleases one’s
  friends to have their friends like one.”

Up to this point the friendship had been an almost unqualified gain,
but, little by little, Miss Hill began to feel the strain of dividing
herself—so to speak—between her family, her comrade and her work. In May
1861 she was called away by the illness of her friend, Miss Harris,[20]
and the change to an ideally peaceful life was just what she needed. Her
own health had begun to suffer and she remained on at the Lakes for some
months to gain strength. In her absence, S. J.-B. took on her own
shoulders in great measure the responsibilities of householder. Hitherto
her acquaintance with the other members of the Hill family had been
slight, but a warm friendship now sprang up between her and the sister,
Miranda, who often shared the meals made ready by the devoted Alice and
served by her in her young mistress’ room. Few young people in the first
glow of a new friendship have sufficient tact, self-control and
knowledge of life to avoid all risk of wounding their elders, and such
tact would scarcely be possible in a nature like S. J.-B.’s. Little rubs
and frictions increased, and no doubt Octavia was the confidante of all.
In July she writes:

Footnote 20:

  _Life of Octavia Hill._

  “I hold myself prepared to come when it seems right, sure to be given
  strength to do my duty, but certainly not longing for anything that
  will bring me again into a world of contention. I can’t bear to think
  how pained you would be if you could know the strength of this
  feeling, for I know you would feel it a failure of love. I tell you
  all this because I am sure you will feel it in my letters, because I
  am sure such a cloud hurts less when frankly confessed, because I am
  sure such a friendship as yours and mine need not fear it, remaining
  untouched and immoveable, based on what can neither change nor know
  fear.... All my life long this dread and misery about even the
  slightest contention or estrangement has taken the form of misery,
  continually saying in itself, ‘I can_not_ bear it.’ Since physical
  strength has left me so far this wretched dread has increased
  tenfold....

  How delightfully kind and good you are to everybody. I can fancy I see
  you, brightly kind, good and energetic, going about among all the
  people, entertaining monitors, inviting my sisters to tea, giving club
  dinners, learning about examinations, arranging the play, talking to
  Miss Boucherett, delighting to plan work and holiday for them all....
  When I have thought, as I often have, that it is probable that I may
  never have strength to work any more, you cannot think how I have
  clung to the thought of your ever ready and powerful help and care.”

Through all this tide of affection, one wonders whether S. J.-B. in any
way realized the very genuine apprehension her friend felt about
returning to the atmosphere of contention. The probability is that she
did not realize it at all, or rather that she looked upon it as the
expression of a transient mood caused by physical weakness. No doubt she
made a generous resolve that “everything should be made easy for Octa”
when she returned; but she did not realize how great was the need for
resolve. She never saw her own personality from the outside; and of
course hers was not the only “temperament” in the house. No member of
the family could have been described as a mere cabbage.

We all know how friction increases when the machinery is out of gear:
differences of opinion grew: Mr. and Mrs. Jex-Blake protested against
the imprudence of accepting a banker’s reference only, in the case of a
foreigner who was in terms for the rooms, and for once their daughter
upheld their view with tenacity. Finally,—though this not till October—
the state of strain became so great that Octavia was summoned home.

One can sympathize profoundly with her in the difficult situation she
was called upon to face. She knew by this time what the faults were on
both sides, knew in particular that S. J.-B. was not a placid person;
began to guess perhaps that explosions of temper were as essential to
that generous nature as the thunderstorm is to a stretch of summer days.
Meanwhile everyone was counting on her to solve the difficulty with a
wave of her wand: and here was she, never very robust, weary with a long
journey, called away from a congenial holiday to the intimate
association with a thousand and one petty cares in addition to the
special crisis that had summoned her home.

The extracts given above are a mere gleaning from many unpublished
letters which bear witness to her devoted attachment to S. J.-B., but
although her sympathy with her own mother was perhaps less fervent at
this time than it afterwards became—she had a strong sense of filial
affection and duty. Moreover she had her work in the world to do—
invaluable work we know it proved—and she felt that she could only do it
in an atmosphere of peace and quiet.

Assuredly it was not an easy situation to face. Looking back upon the
whole story after more than half-a-century, one cannot but wish that she
had simply _compelled_ S. J.-B. to realize the truth,—that she found
herself unable to live and do her work unless she could have the peace
that her soul loved, that—much as she had profited up to a certain point
by the stimulating friendship of one so unlike herself—the time had come
when she found that friendship too stimulating under present conditions.
Surely—one fancies—some arrangement might have been arrived at by which
so mutually beneficial a friendship might have been continued.

Miss Hill, however, decided otherwise. In the watches of that first
night, after a long talk with her Mother (a talk that, in the nature of
the case, can scarcely have emphasized S. J.-B.’s point of view), before
she had even seen her friend, she resolved to forego even the semblance
of an attempt to reconcile these conflicting claims. Something must go,
and that something must not be the mother and sisters to whom she had
devoted most of her ardent young life, the mother and sisters who
depended on her wisdom and goodness more even than they knew.

It was one thing to make the great resolve: it was quite another to
explain it to the friend whose one conscious desire was to make Octa’s
life an easy one.

So she set her face like a flint, and, for the first time in the course
of their friendship, she refused to see S. J.-B.’s side of the question
at all. Peace must be secured at all costs, and, if peace was to be
secured, this delightful exacting friendship must end. S. J.-B. might
retain her rooms for the time as a matter of business—

But neither S. J.-B. nor her indignant Mother would listen to that.

Well, then, let it all go. The time for half measures—or so Miss Hill
thought—was over. All intercourse must cease. “The relentless knife must
cut sheer through.”

How much the effort cost her we gather from the extent to which she
overdid the part. She was at the end of her tether, so to speak, and
acting, doubtless, on an instinct of sheer self-preservation, she would
allow no discussion of any kind. She set her face so flintily that S.
J.-B. was driven in uttermost bewilderment to the conclusion that the
complete withdrawal was due to some extraordinary aberration on the part
of her friend—an aberration for which so noble a being could not be
responsible, and which might therefore come to an end as suddenly as it
had begun. A thousand times she had said to herself, “Everything will be
right when Octavia comes!” And now, behold, Octavia was here, and it was
no Octavia. It was a fairy changeling to whom the beautiful past was a
thing unknown. The rupture was so complete that it was no rupture. It
was a nightmare, an inexplicable darkness at noonday, something so
contrary to all known laws of nature that it could not last. This hope,
this attitude of expectancy, was encouraged by the extraordinarily
tender and appreciative letters which, at intervals for some years,
broke through Miss Hill’s reserve. In one of these letters, dated Nov.
5th, she writes:

  “Oh, Sophy, how splendidly you and your Mother did act those last days
  that now seem so far away.... When I see how deep your forethought
  was, so loving as to have remembered the very slightest things that
  might be the least trouble to us when you were no longer near to take
  care of us, one feels as if an angel had (may I not say still is
  taking) care of us.”

A generous letter indeed, but in the face of such letters was it any
wonder that S. J.-B. failed as of old to grasp the extent of the
difficulty,—that she refused to accept the situation as final,—that she
lived on in hope, and often all but intolerable suspense? “Did I want to
learn constancy?” she says.

If the lesson was needed, most assuredly it was learned. Till the close
of her life the friendship on her side remained unbroken, although she
ceased in time to speak of it even to her most intimate friends; in
repeated wills she left the whole of her little property to Miss
Hill,[21] and, although other friends came in time to fill the empty
place—although she even wrote playfully in her diary some twenty years
later of her “fanciful faithfulness”—until the eve of her last illness
she would not extinguish the hope that “even in this life” the
friendship might be renewed.

Footnote 21:

  Until circumstances rendered Miss Hill independent of such aid.

One might say more than this. From the time of the rupture, Octavia Hill
became to S. J.-B. a pure ideal—something of what the subject of the _In
Memoriam_ was to the author of that wonderful threnody.

In any case the whole history of the friendship was destined to lie on
higher levels because Octavia Hill had felt bound to break it off.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                             A STEP BEYOND


It has never been customary among students of human nature to attach
great importance to the outpourings of a romantic friendship, save in
the rare cases where these have achieved consummate literary form. The
religion of the adolescent, too, is a thing that we are apt to take a
good deal for granted. In S. J.-B.’s case, however, the ideal—the
vision—to which this brief friendship gave rise throws a light on
potentialities of feeling and expression which we should otherwise never
have had. The fact that so apparently transient a gleam should have
given rise to a great and lasting inspiration lifts the passages that
follow quite out of the category of the great mass of similar
experiences.

The effect of one personality upon another is a thing we can never
predict and seldom explain. It is not a mere question of addition or
even of multiplication. The process is a vital one which can never be
mechanically reckoned out. We all see over and over again in life how
the receiver may contribute as much as the giver—the pupil no less than
the teacher. When the word of God went forth from Sinai, we are told,
_each man heard it in the tongue in which he was born_.

In any case that strange and new experience came with the force of a
ferment to S. J.-B. “She was never the same again,” says a lifelong
friend, looking back on the whole history after more than fifty years:
“it cut her life in two.” But the cutting in two—like the division of
the primordial cell—was the earnest, not of death, but of life on a
larger scale.

“My Mother’s full glorious sympathy! What could I do without that? God
bless her, my darling,—mine for ever.”

So writes S. J.-B. in the first days of her trial. If anyone knew the
meaning of the words, “as one whom his mother comforteth,” it was she.

And never did she need that comfort more than now. She left the house in
Nottingham Place at once, but she gallantly finished her term at Queen’s
College and then went home to Brighton. “I must _not_ get bitter and
cynical,” she says. “I don’t think I shall. And yet the crash has been
awful.”

As often before in lesser troubles she was thrown back on her own deep
religious faith.

  “Bankrupt?” she asks herself. “No, by God’s grace, no! No personal
  trouble, no trouble of any kind, _can_ wreck a life in His charge.
  Still His,—that the strong, the enduring thought.

  From this very threshold of pain, whatever be its present issue, shall
  go forth an earnest patient life,—to continue Christ’s faithful
  soldier and servant to my life’s end.

  Yes, I,—Christ’s soldier! Yes, earnestly, heartily, entirely, though
  speculatively this Christ I know not,—though my mind asks in all
  uncertainty What and Who?...

  Dogmas are one thing; life is another.

  Doing is clear; ‘doing the will,’—‘knowing the doctrine’ shall come
  later. Not _believing_ though. I mean _understanding_,—receiving with
  reason and mind.”

So she prepared her altar, “and put no fire under,” but the flash came.

  “Dec. 13th. Sunday. 11.45 p.m. Who could have believed what a happy
  holy evening has succeeded to all the pain, storm and whirlwind of the
  morning?

  Dr. Smith’s death.[22] The loss of Octavia’s day,—her visit of one
  hour; the utter stupor of misery. Then, with all the pain, the perfect
  feeling of content and assurance of Rightness in things. Then this
  happy evening, lifting me altogether out of myself and my pain into
  the trials and struggles and efforts and interests of Lucy and Emily,—
  and, thank God, the power of helping both. Now this calm perfect
  peace, which sends me to bed ‘resting.’... Oh, God is most merciful,
  most bountiful. ‘Like as a Father pitieth his children’.”

Footnote 22:

  Dr. Southwood Smith, Miss Hill’s grandfather.

                                              “12 p.m. Sunday night.

  Don’t chide me for writing late, Mother. I must speak to you. If I
  could give you an idea of the peaceful, happy evening I have had,—
  sending me to bed with a heart full of love and joy and thankfulness.
  No, nothing has changed in outer things. I have no other news. But
  perfect peace has come. I can hardly tell you how happy I am, Mother.

  I have had such a happy, holy evening with two or three of the
  girls.... And God seemed to give me such wonderful power to help them,
  and I believe He has helped them. And in all this—I know not how, but
  I wake up at their departing ... to find that somehow God has rolled
  away my burden utterly.

  I had forgotten it and myself altogether, and now I can find neither.
  I can hardly believe in the pain and misery of the morning, it seems a
  dim, far-off memory.

  Is it not wonderful, Mother? Goodnight, my own darling.

                              Yours very very lovingly,
                                                              SOPHY.

  I do not know when I could so fully and entirely say, ‘I will lay me
  down _in peace_ and sleep, for Thou, Lord, only makest me to dwell in
  safety.’”

Follows an undated fragment, probably written to her Mother next
morning:

  “—passed other quiet wayfarers, just as heavily weighted. How gentle
  it ought to make one,—to see how utterly ignorant one may be of sorrow
  at one’s elbow,—how one can only be _generally_ tender to people, if
  one would escape striking down an already tottering neighbour because
  one does not and cannot know his needs.

  It is only God who sees _which_ is the bruised reed, and cherishes
  that specially,—or can do so.

  I am thinking how near 4 o’clock is coming. It may bring me a kiss and
  a word from my darling. I am sure tonight’s post will at any rate.

  Well, dear, I have you always and forever, and with you only I could
  never be desolate. And I have her too,—though she doesn’t know it now.

                                  Yours very very lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

  “4.30 p.m. Thanks, many, darling, for your loving little note. You
  will know before this that the cloud is not dispersing in the way you
  mean,—that it has only more fully and certainly overspread the sky.
  Yet there is—and will be more and more, please God,—a light in it
  too.”

                                          “Dec. 16th 1861. 8.30 p.m.

  MY OWN DARLING MOTHER,

        Thanks so many for the loving little scrap of letter which I
  knew would come to comfort me.

  The sympathy is always delicious, but the active need for it is
  utterly gone. You will have got my last night’s letter, so Mother will
  not go to bed with a sad heart for her baby.

  Yesterday I was wondering how it should be possible that I should ever
  live out the next three days till I got home to you. Now every sort of
  trouble seems to have fled utterly away. I never knew before the
  meaning of the words, ‘the peace that passeth understanding’....

  I every now and then wake up with a kind of start of wonder to find
  such a sunny smile of heart gladness all over my face. And people see
  it too. It would be very odd if they didn’t when the whole world is
  changed to me. It is the most wonderful separation of the inner from
  the outer world that I ever knew. I suppose nothing is changed in the
  physical world, but everything seems for me bright and golden,—as in
  my Welsh tour with Octavia (I can speak of it and her now with perfect
  quiet peace), as in those days at Hurst.

  Last night I thought it most glorious, but too delicious to last; but
  it seems now the atmosphere of life, as if nothing can touch or shake
  it....

  Mother, a grand solemn wonder comes with it all, whether it is that
  when we have actually and literally given up every will and wish to
  God,—have rested utterly and entirely on Him with perfect trust—
  whether then pain loses its power, and only blessing, even now, _can_
  come.

  ... if so, what a glorious future one sees for all the sorrowful
  here,—for all the tried and suffering. ‘For _all_ the wanderers the
  home is one’. The pain only till it has brought the bliss; the All-
  loving Father that cannot wound but to heal.

  Now my spirit is so perfectly at rest, all my strength seems to have
  come back to me like Samson. I feel as if Edinbro’ or anything else
  was nothing to me. ‘He hath set my heart at liberty’,—that is the very
  truth. Mother, how naturally in every depth of sorrow or joy one turns
  to those words about which _verbally_ we quarrel,—not really or
  deeply, Mother.

               Goodnight, my own Darling,
                                      Yours very lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

From diary:

  “Dec. 16th Monday. ‘For as soon as ever thou hast delivered thyself to
  God with thy whole heart, and seekest not this or that for thine own
  pleasure or will, but fixest thyself wholly upon Him, thou shalt find
  thyself united and at peace.’

                                                   THOMAS A KEMPIS.”

  “Dec. 22nd. Sunday, 11 p.m. The last thread actually broken,—the
  parting over.

  Left London on Thursday evening by the 8 p.m....

  Well, it is all in hands that cannot err,—speculative sceptic as I may
  be, practically my trust is as firm as the rock on which it rests. My
  Father doth do all things well,—and even makes me feel it,—even now.
  And surely, to take a lower ground, I have been an inapt pupil if the
  lessons of the last few months have not taught me the utter
  impossibility of calculating the possibilities of the future.

  Should I have believed from man or angel on Tuesday the first the
  events of Thursday the last of October?

  But we don’t want low ground. He is the rock,—His work _is_ perfect.

  And He will care for my child.”

Of course this mood of exaltation could not go on unbroken, except at
the cost of sanity itself. Hours of reaction had to come. “We might have
done _anything_ together, we two!”

  “Dec. 29th Sunday. Tonight the bitterness seemed doubled in finding
  ‘my teachers removed out of my sight.’ I just feeling my way to
  truth,—saved by her from so much doubt and possible infidelity. Well,
  God will teach me, will He not, Himself,—so Mother said. I cannot (or
  feel as if I could not: _cannot_ is not a word for ‘Christ’s soldier
  and servant’, is it?) put it all away. I seem so physically weak and
  _rotten_, so unable to exert will and force myself to be quiet.

  But I have found something to do. I behave infamously to the dear old
  man. Well! I mean to throw my whole being into being a good child at
  home. I _won’t_ be rude and bad to him!

  Now record this vow for a week,—don’t be superstitious, Jack; say ‘God
  helping me’ and go on,—forget yourself. Just do this piece of work,—
  and wait.

  So be it.

  What was the ‘chief evil’ to which the suffering must be directed to
  be sufficient?

  ‘Selfishness,’ said I.

  Truly, Jack. And what is it but intolerable selfishness,—this brooding
  over a ‘bootless bene’,—this expecting sympathy and all sorts of
  kindness and excuse from my Mother and the rest, and talking about
  nerves and fiddle-de-dees,—instead of forgetting myself and seeing to
  my work and to other people.

  Well, God helping me, now for a new leaf—of strength and resolve
  instead of whining self-pity.”

It was with this inspiration that she wrote to one of her pupils:

                                                   “Dec. 31st. 1861.

  DEAR LUCY,

        ... My Modern History was all right, thank you,—I forgot you had
  it. By the bye, your handwriting seems to me to have ‘suffered an
  improvement’—I must congratulate you.

  I am very glad you think I have helped you, dear child,—my life has
  been a very pleasant one in London,—its memory will be pleasanter
  still if it has been too not quite useless to some of the people who
  have helped to make it so. I could not easily count the people who
  have helped me,—some directly,—some merely ‘by living.’ It is a
  glorious thing, is it not, to be a link in that chain of help which
  encircles the world,—to pass on to another what one has given us,—
  feeling how all our broken bits of help and gift are gathered up in
  the perfection of the Great Giver and ‘Father of Lights.’

  I do heartily hope that you will go back to Queen’s just to take and
  hold your place in that chain. Only do quite resolutely take your part
  for the highest and noblest,—remember ‘the soldier and servant’, and
  remember how very far we are from helping when we acquiesce in any
  wrong doing,—in any low standard of right and wrong, even by silence.

  I do not think it would be easy to over-estimate the importance of a
  high pure tone among the leading girls at such a place as Queen’s,—
  perhaps such as you and L. hardly know what a power lies in your
  hands, for the very life of the College,—and mayn’t we look higher
  than that, and say for our Master’s work?

  And after all that is the true and simple way of looking at it,—for
  consequences we can’t calculate,—but we always can know right from
  wrong, and the rest is not our affair.

  Well, dear child, God bless and guide you,—that is the true help.”

And, finally, she writes in her diary:

  “Dec. 31st. 1861. The last day of the year! Now to ‘take stock’. I
  have just finished, and balanced exactly my money matters (within a
  deficit of 2s. 8d. with which I left London). Now for the moral and
  historical. See the last volume for the beginning of the year. _How_
  well I remember the last day last year. Does she? How we did and
  sorted accounts till the chimes,—and then leant together out of the
  window in our new house fresh with plans and hopes, saying so
  hopefully,

                   ‘And may the New Year cherish
                   All the hopes that now are bright.’

  And now truly almost,

             ‘For all my earthly hopes this (year) did kill.’

  It is almost dreadful to look back and see how this book opens with a
  jest. How full of joke and spirit all seems! The ‘deep waters’ have
  come this year as never before. But it is a strange wild comfort to
  find in myself so much _capacity_ for suffering. I had always despised
  myself as a weak shallow nature, to leave others to suffer and escape
  with a laugh....

  (Wrote one last letter to Frid[23] tonight—for her birthday tomorrow.
  Weak? I think not.)

  Well, now to ‘take stock’:

  The opening of the year, bright, clear, hopeful. Octavia’s visit to
  the north, but that no real break. Our delight in our new house,—its
  quiet and peace. Some disappointment is not letting, but that very
  endurable. No bar to happiness....

  Then the return of Frid and Florence. My unwilling acquaintance
  ripening gradually into love for Frid, called forth perhaps first by
  her great love for me.

  Then our glorious Whitsuntide at Hurst,—Octa and I. The few days
  (Thursday to Tuesday) pure unmixed heart sunshine. Purer and deeper if
  possible than that of Wales.

  Then the strange double summons on May 21st., she to Mary Harris, I to
  the O’Briens. Coming like a thunderbolt on our week, but accepted by
  both obediently and willingly. Together to London. Then my mission to
  Tufnell Park. The hurried tea, the night mail, the parting hand
  pressure as the train moved, ‘in the sure and certain hope’—is it
  blasphemous so to use the words? I think not. There was a glorious
  churchlike solemnity always on our love. Well!—then the five months’
  parting,—hard it seemed then, but painless—heaven—to what came after.

  Perhaps I am not yet meant to see the ‘why’ of all that followed....
  We seemed so helpful heavenwards to each other. Never seemed our love
  truer, deeper, purer,—I know though _now_ that mine _could_ be all
  three.

  Yet with all this wondering, I do and have felt most solemnly. Surely
  it is best. ‘We shall see in Heaven why it could not be otherwise.’

  At least, Octavia, you have never had (in me at least) so true and
  deep and leal a friend as now,—and yet quieter and so stronger.

  And for her—God have her in His holy keeping!

  I feel some work has been done when I can say as deeply, truly as now
  that no earthly blessing could seem to me (except relating to my
  Mother) comparable to her restoration to me (for every feeling of hurt
  or wound or injury seems merged in deep earnest love ‘beyond words’)
  yet I am ready, and God helping me able to go through the world—
  darkened and lightless as it seemed a few weeks ago—and feel it yet my
  Father’s own world, ‘very good’ yet: ready in it manfully and
  cheerfully to take up my burden, and again and forever as ‘Christ’s
  faithful soldier and servant’ to fight manfully till my life’s end—so
  help me God!”

Footnote 23:

  Miss Miranda Hill.




                               CHAPTER IX
                     FIRST EXPERIENCE OF EDINBURGH


It is the great miracle of life—that first glow and uplifting of the
soul in touch with the Unseen. “The immediate consciousness of the
religious man,” said Hegel, “has in it an infinite worth, because an
infinite content.” For the moment it seems as if all the difficulties of
life were swept away, as if nothing temporal could matter any more. But
if the world at large is to be ennobled and spiritualised by these
individual experiences, the inspiration has got to be worked out in “the
commonplace clay with which the world provides us.”

And here comes in an all-important point, to which, on the whole, far
too little significance has been attached. To some of those who have the
vision, Fate gives a tractable, malleable lump of clay, limited in mass,
fine in texture, ready to respond to the lightest touch of the potter:
and so we get sweet and saintly characters whose lives will bear the
minutest inspection—such characters as Maurice and Eugénie de Guérin, or
the wonderful family described in _Le Récit d’une Soeur_. But there are
some to whose lot a very different problem falls. The big and rough jobs
of the world-spirit have to be tackled somehow. There are unwieldy
masses of clay, full of grit and impurities, masses that do not seem to
respond to the creative impulse at all. Rough handling, bold tunnelling
may be required; and if it be true,—as it is—that the first beauty of
the spiritual vision seems degraded in _any_ attempt at realization, how
much more is this the case when the seer is baffled and thwarted at
every turn by the sheer inertness and stupidity of the lump, so to
speak, when he is forced to resort to almost brutal methods in order to
get his idea expressed at all.

God gives man the vision and the lump of clay; and many a man who
escapes the censure of his fellows gives back the two separately to God,
like the talent wrapped in a napkin: some men are privileged to return a
piece of work that all eyes can value in a trice: and some, “with aching
hands and bleeding feet” have merely blocked out a great conception,
have half-unconsciously drafted the rough outline of one of the
Almighty’s big schemes, an outline on the details of which smaller souls
will be abundantly occupied for generations to come.

Before we judge of the finish of a man’s life, before we judge of its
correspondence with what he believes to be his inspiration, let us ask—
What was the extent of the problem it had to grapple with?—What was the
mass and what the condition of the clay?—What, in a word, was the man’s
_task_?

There must, of course, be some sort of affinity, some mesmeric
attraction,—even if this should seem to show itself in an actual
distaste—between the man and the task. So far as human stupidity makes
this possible, we must believe that God Almighty chooses His man, and
the work of the Almighty would be singularly limited in range if He
chose for His purpose only those whose natural endowments are such as to
make them an unqualified credit to any cause they may espouse.

All this must be specially borne in mind in judging the subsequent life
of S. J.-B. We are bound, of course, to ask how she worked out in life
this beautiful vision of her adolescence—bound to ask how she realized
in practice the “infinite (potential) worth and content” of that first
radiant consciousness; but before we attempt to answer the question, we
must take into full account the extent and the difficulty of the task
that fell to her share, and we must give full weight to the natural
attributes which were the tools placed at her disposal.

It is clear that there was about her a doggedness, a high-handedness, a
disregard of tradition, an actual—if superficial—roughness, which are
not common qualities among the highly-educated of either sex, and which
were never admired in her own. On the other hand, the reader of the
foregoing pages will no longer need to be told of her tenderness and
sensitiveness—of a capacity for loving and for suffering only
commensurate with her power of inspiring love, of incurring suffering.
In a sense she was a born fighter, but it is a very nice question how
far she enjoyed a fight. Thousands of times throughout life she might
truly have repeated the extract from her diary quoted on p. 46:

  “This brought down an awful storm of wonder, reasoning, etc., till at
  length I got off to bed _so_ tired.”

The diary continues after the extract quoted in the last chapter:

  “And now to turn to the outer facts of life.

  Here I am, my London College life over, with all its pleasures, all
  its cares, all its responsibilities, all its glorious delight at
  times.

  Ten terms have I kept,—ten passed since the beginning of that second
  volume of mine! How sorrowfully meagre seems the record. Yet ‘the
  world could scarcely contain’ what _might_ have been written.

  My rooms in Nottingham Place given up (first and second floors let to
  Vs.). The world before me. Alice only bound to me. My life in Scotland
  to begin whenever rested. Wants sufficient resolution to make that
  ‘when.’ Yet I expect very needful.

  I suppose the shock to my whole being of the last three months could
  not be easily reckoned. Two months today since I left N.P.!

  Again the burden has been lightened since my resolve (how inadequately
  worked out!) of Sunday night. Not only Watch, but _Work_ and wait!...

  By-the-bye, Frid’s lovely Christmas gift,—Christ on the Cross. The
  Child Christ and verses (her’s?)

                     ‘The love that brings salvation
                     _Shall_ at last prevail!’

  Amen.”

“My life in Scotland to begin whenever rested.”

It is not easy to say what induced S. J.-B. to seek farther education in
Scotland, except that she was anxious to extend her experience in every
possible way. A few years later, thanks to the efforts of Mrs.
Crudelius, Professor Masson, Miss Louisa Stevenson, and others, the
University Classes for Women at Shandwick Place were successfully
started, but in 1862 there is no reason to think women were better off
in Edinburgh than in any other town of the same size. A report seems to
have gone forth, however, of the superior advantages offered by some
institution, and S. J.-B. went north—accompanied by her faithful maid,
Alice—full of hope and ambition. On her last night at home, by an
interesting coincidence, she heard a sermon that impressed her on the
text: “They have no changes: therefore they fear not God.”

The link that bound her with the world on which she was entering was of
the slightest. Mrs. Burn Murdoch (_née_ Miss Dora Monck Mason) was an
old schoolfellow, a contemporary of Caroline Jex-Blake, and the
traveller carried with her an introduction to Miss Margaret Orr, sister
of Captain (now General) Orr who afterwards married one of the Norfolk
cousins, Miss Henrietta Cubitt. In these acquaintanceships—both of which
were to ripen into lifelong friendships—S. J.-B. was very fortunate; but
as far as the immediate object of the pilgrimage was concerned, she was
destined to bitter disappointment.

Here is her own account of her first lesson:

  “Then went in to the Arithmetic class. Found the first division doing
  Proportion! And, oh, such teaching! First question:—‘If cloth is
  bought for 2s. a yard, at what price must it be sold to gain 25 per
  cent?’ ... exhortation following in this style,—‘Now say and exameen
  carefully’ (_broad_ Scotch) ‘I think ye’ll find it need consideration,
  etc.’ ‘It’s not quite a deerect question, etc., etc.’ ‘Now what will
  be the third terrm?’ ‘Stand up the ladies who can answer. What, Miss
  McCreechie! I think ye’ll hardly tell me, but ye can try, etc., etc.’
  And, sure enough, long took this abstruse question to solve.

  And such a lesson! No explaining,—some scolding, some shouting,—a good
  deal of cry and small wool. Then he came to me. ‘Can ye do
  proportion?’ ‘Yes (!) I want to do Algebra.’ ‘Ay,—but that’ll be
  Friday. But do ye know Fractions?’ I intimated an idea that I did. He
  didn’t seem at all to believe it,—‘did I understand them?’ I felt
  rather absurd and hypocritical, and again said I _did_ rather
  decidedly. However not a bit would he believe me,—gave me (as a severe
  test, I suppose) ¾ x ⅝ to do and explain. Well,—did it! ‘But why?’ I
  am sure I shall always hereafter have pity on unfortunate examinees
  pounced upon. The whole thing seemed so absurd,—I was so annoyed,—it
  seemed so silly standing up by that imp of a Sandy with a slate,—that
  I very nearly failed to give any rational explanation. However I did
  somewhat, and he had rather grudgingly to grant, ‘Ay, I see ye know
  it.’ Then, when I asked him about the Algebra, it seemed he had none
  but quite beginners (don’t I pity them?) and ‘it wasn’t his subject’!
  in fact, clearly enough he didn’t know as much as I did. Amazed at my
  astounding erudition, ‘Where had I learned?’ ‘Oh, in England.’ ‘Ay?’
  (very surprised) ‘the English gairls generally come very bad at
  Arithmetic,—we’ve one just now doesn’t know her tables.’ I laughed
  out. ‘Well, you mustn’t take her for a specimen.’ He seemed to think
  that the national average! ‘Ay, but most we’ve had are very bad at
  it,’ very resolutely. He must be a good judge by the specimen I saw.
  Well, he kept hovering round me as a sort of strange animal, and told
  me how the girls changed every year, and how he went through from the
  First Rules to Decimals as the _ne plus ultra_.”

Clearly there was nothing to be gained here, so next morning she
“explained and apologised” to the Principal, and found him “very nice
and pleasant.” Her first impulse was to go straight back to London (in
fact arrangements were made for her to live with Miss Wodehouse and
study at Bedford College) but in the end wiser counsels prevailed. That
arithmetic class was not the high-water mark of Edinburgh achievement
even as regarded the education of its women. S. J.-B. made the
acquaintance of Miss Blyth, who introduced her to Mr. Begbie, Miss de
Dreux and others, so she settled down to a varied course of work, living
comfortably in lodgings with Alice to “do for her.” To Mr. Begbie she
expresses her gratitude over and over again.

  “Mathematics not much with S. In answer to Miss de Dreux told the
  truth. They so nice sensible and honest,—teachers born, ‘without
  respect of persons’. Mr. Begbie glad to hear truth,—promises me a
  better far tomorrow. Mr. Weisse a good teacher,—right good. German
  less formidable than I expected.”

One gathers from the letters that she made an extraordinarily vivid
impression on her teachers: several of them refused to take fees, and
Mr. Begbie persisted in his refusal.

“Miss de Dreux said my coming and work had given her a fresh impetus and
help forward. Isn’t that nice?”

On the whole these first months in Edinburgh though she talks afterwards
of their “grey pain,” were perhaps the high-water mark of S. J.-B.’s
life as regards sheer balance and beauty of living. She was having, it
is true, no physical recreation, but, apart from that, her faculties
were all called equally into play. She was working steadily and hard,
chiefly at her beloved mathematics: her wider reading included _Jane
Eyre_, _Le Juif Errant_ and _Aids to Faith_: she was profoundly
interested in religious problems and conscientiously attended the
churches of the best-known Edinburgh ministers: she was happy in her
friendships, and still more in the passing beauty of her relation to her
Mother: above all, the flame of her religious life—in which was almost
merged at this time her devotion to Miss Octavia Hill—was burning with a
clearness that made it easy to ignore the little jars and frictions.
Even politics were not crowded out. “Daddy is here,” says Mrs. Jex-Blake
in one of her letters, “and says, ‘Tell dearest Sophy I would not have
the _Times_, which she makes such excellent use of, given up on any
account.’”

One cannot read the record of this period of her life without feeling
that it was mainly here and now that her character was made,—that it was
the resolute determination with which she took to work and stuck to it
as the remedy for intolerable heartache—that enabled her in later years
to bear the brunt of all she came through.

It is interesting to hear what she herself has to say about the various
elements in her life referred to above:

  “There never was such a book as _Jane Eyre_—of its kind. Talk of
  ‘finding’—that finds me through and through continually. How people
  _dare_ speak ill of such a book,—I suppose they simply can’t
  understand it. Its grand steadfastness and earnestness and purity, is
  something glorious. I read and re-read it as I never could another
  novel, and how it helps one!”

Again:

  “_Aids to Faith_ put into my trunk by that dear old Mother who in her
  weaker moment entertains an uncomfortable kind of desire to
  proselytize me,—and yet can’t be quite dissatisfied.

  Immensely interested in _Aids to Faith_. Read Cook’s Ideology and
  Subscription, Brown’s ‘Inspiration,’ and am reading Mansel’s
  ‘Miracles.’ The last gives me a glimpse of light and clearness I never
  had before. As far as I have read (and remember _Essays and Reviews_,
  which I must get) I think this side has it. As to Ideology I don’t
  understand it and don’t like to take the whole account from the
  adverse side (though there seems great fairness and scholarlike
  equity). As to subscription, I think Cook has it,—I never could
  heartily sympathize with the other position, though I know it is held
  by quite good and honest men. I suppose one real question might
  arise,—Who is to determine the real sense of the Church? For doubtless
  very grave doubts are found among equally good men.

  As to ‘Inspiration,’ though I like the Essay, I hold more with E. and
  R. a good deal. Most of all with Coleridge as quoted in _Aids_,—‘what
  finds me’ is its own witness, but why impose upon me what is not,
  because bound in the same covers?”

One finds among her papers brief notes of sermons by Rainy, Candlish,
Guthrie and Pulsford, of whom the last appealed to her most.

  “The prayers are what I can’t manage in the Scottish kirk. ‘Other
  people’s’ need too much effort to approve or disapprove to leave your
  spirit free to _pray_. I find more and more the value and _rest_ of
  the Liturgy.... Saw Unitarian chapel. Shall I go? Don’t expect to be
  in near such real sympathy as with Church of England. Octa always said
  so. Bless her!”

For many reasons she was anxious to bring herself into line with the
orthodox; she accuses herself of being too ready for an argument with
her Calvinistic friends (what earnest spirit is not too ready for an
argument at her age?) and at this time she read the Gospels carefully
through “with a fresh mind,” taking notes that might have a bearing on
dogma. If it distressed her to arrive at an unorthodox conclusion, this
was mainly because such a conclusion seemed to separate her from those
she loved best.

In the meantime she had made the acquaintance of Mr. Pulsford, and had
called to have a talk with him about her difficulties.

  “Much helpful sympathy and no horror of my questionings (how helpful
  that is!) but not much direct word gain. I suppose it must be _lived_
  out. He clearly does hold the Trinity, yet not, I think, as some do.
  Certainly not the vicarious Atonement. He uses nearly Maurice’s
  words,—‘To present humanity perfect to God.’ (I think they are
  Maurice’s.) He believes Christ the man to have been God, but at first
  in His manhood unconscious of His Godhead. This seems to me very
  questionable and not clear. However, as I said—and he agreed
  thoroughly—not being a question of spirit but of history, it is not
  vital to me now, and living and desiring to know, we _shall_ know.

  He again spoke strongly of not talking to people who _can’t_
  understand.”

The contrast of the next paragraph in the diary is irresistible:

  “A mouse caught at last. Odd, how it annoys me! ‘Shall I drown it,
  ma’am?’ ‘Oh, let it eat its cheese first!’ How Octa’d laugh! Faugh!—
  poor little thing, how it struggled for its life,—and how my heart
  beat! It was some courage to resolve it shouldn’t suffer longer than
  need be.”

About her friends she has much to say as usual. On March 31st she writes
to Cousin Ellie:

  “Now for friends. I think I really may put that word to Dora Burn
  Murdoch and Margaret Orr, short as the time seems in days since I have
  known them; but then days sometimes go for weeks and they have both
  been _so_ kind to me. ‘I was a stranger and they took me in.’ [Dora’s]
  charity for others is something quite beautiful, her unconsciousness
  of other people’s inferiority to her,—her width of thought, and power
  of understanding those differing most widely from herself—most
  admirable. You never hear her by any chance say a harsh thing, a
  spiteful thing or a narrow thing,—neither do you ever hear a weak
  one.”

She speaks many times in her diary of the rest and refreshment derived
from visits to Mrs. Burn Murdoch. But she was working too hard, and Mrs.
Jex-Blake’s letters at this time take on an even deeper note than usual
of love, appreciation and solicitude. Varieties of note-paper were not
great in those days, so S. J.-B. had possessed herself of a large
quantity of common brown envelopes (similar to those used for the
delivery of telegrams) in order that her Mother might see at a glance—
without putting on her spectacles!—whether the postman had brought the
all-important thing. Many are Mrs. Jex-Blake’s references to “the
precious brown envelope,” “the dear brown letters”; and well might she
prize them. Indeed one does not know which to admire more,—the
painstaking labour with which S. J.-B., at the end of a hard day’s work,
strove to keep her Mother informed of all she was thinking and doing and
trying to do—or the painstaking labour with which her Mother strove to
understand and sympathize. She writes at great length about _Jane Eyre_,
about the higher education of women, and she enters into her daughter’s
religious arguments with a largeness of soul that is simply uplifting:

  “I expect,” she says, “I quoted in commas the very words _you_ wrote
  about the Atonement. The rest was, of course, my able and learned
  commentary. I _think_ I did take your words in your sense, though I
  couldn’t help their _expanding_—you will perhaps say, narrowing,—in my
  view. He will guide us both into all truth.”

The following extracts give some idea how these beautiful letters go on:

  May 6th. “I don’t think I ever had a letter from you that I did not
  enjoy and enter into sympathy with, because I never will open them
  _till_ I can enjoy them. Sometimes one has come at dinner time with
  others when Mr. O. has been here, and he has said,—‘Why don’t you open
  the brown letter? I know it interests you.’ I answer, ‘Just because I
  can’t fully enjoy it’.”

  May 7th. “You have a glorious field of usefulness before you. No one
  can guess to what extent you may be permitted to be useful to the
  generations to come. Plod on; expect rough waves that seem ready to
  overwhelm your best energies, and almost quench life; but One sitteth
  above the water floods Who will always bear you through.”

  May 8th. “My heart’s desire is that you should know _the truth of
  God_, whether it be what I believe or not, and that I should know it
  too.” (Previously she had written,—“I was thinking today how surely
  God would guide you into all truth,—this text confirming the thought,—
  ‘If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it
  be of God.’)

  I think my cup of blessing would be fuller than I could bear did _we
  two_ fully agree on that which must be all-absorbing and by far the
  most interesting of subjects. Though C. and I essentially agree, we
  cannot communicate with each other—our natures are so different. I
  don’t think I do her justice or fully understand her.”

  May 9th. “We do well to struggle against that weary powerless feeling,
  because, given way to, it might overcome all power of energy, but I
  quite believe it is sometimes part of appointed discipline, and it is
  no use to quarrel with ourselves for it. Still I do incline to believe
  in your present case it proceeds from exhaustion of the nervous
  system, occasioned by a shock struggled against with all your power.
  You will be better when Dora is back, and you get real interchange of
  thought and loving sympathy. God bless her for giving it to my
  darling. Try not to allow yourself to think on getting up,—‘How long
  will it be before I lie down to rest again?’ Remember you desire to
  give yourself to service, though not so active just now, for others.
  Remember as a help how many bless you for having sped them on their
  way. Your want just now is someone to be helped and braced for
  usefulness.”

(“Never fail,” writes Mr. Jex-Blake, “to tell me of any case you know of
like that of the suffering governess; it is blessed to receive in such
cases, but doubly blessed to give.”)

  May 10th. “Own darling, you write me such charming long letters, you
  quite spoil me.... I suppose your work in Edinburgh has been very
  intense while it lasted, and proportionately exhausting,—and then you
  don’t, as a schoolboy does, get any reaction the other way. You have
  no one to play with,—_no_ positive recreation. I always think the
  games and perpetual ‘outings’ in public schools such a fine
  arrangement; and then an Oxonian or Cantab. has his boat or his ride,
  My darling has positively nothing. Don’t little one overwork herself:
  such concentration of thought as you give in one hour is very
  exhausting.”

  May 11th. “I fear it is impossible for me fully to appreciate your
  child, and, even had you done differently, I question whether she and
  I ever would have got at each other, but I _quite_ believe in the
  noble-heartedness you speak of. I would with avidity seize any opening
  she offered, but I fear she will not make it. In the present
  distortion of vision, she is more likely to suppose I am inclined to
  alienate you from her. Had your’s been a common friendship, I should
  have thought it possible that ‘Art might conceal too much,’ but she
  knows you in spite of all your faults and independently of them,—and
  surely the wine was a messenger of love. You _dared_ not have sent it
  had you not been bound up in her.”

On a previous occasion Mrs. Jex-Blake had written on this subject:

  “How very remarkable and interesting is Mr. Pulsford’s statement about
  valued friends apparently lost for a time. I had no idea that your’s
  was a case that ever occurred,—I mean of increased love—a stronger,
  deeper, truer love: it is really very grand.” “I fancy I like ‘Sorrow’
  better than ‘Fidelis,’[24] but the latter is wonderfully your picture.
  _I_ can scarcely grasp it, though I wonder and admire.”

Footnote 24:

    Poems by A. A. Procter.

  May 13th. “I have nearly finished _Jane Eyre_, and like much of it
  exceedingly. What I object to is the personal handling she allows ...
  and, grand as her conduct is, she marries a man of very exceptionable
  conduct, and who to the last had a relish for swearing.... I think she
  makes St. John very unfairly disagreeable,—his icy coldness very
  unnatural....”

  May 15th. “Well, darling, you and I must wait to talk it out about
  _Jane Eyre_. I shall never be able to write it out. It appears to me
  you have built up a wall to knock down.[25] I don’t at all ask a
  different code of morals for men and women. But I do wish a woman to
  be refined and pure, not because I am conventional, but because I
  think it essential to self-respect and dignity.... I don’t believe
  high-toned governesses fall in love with their employers.... I think
  it _very cruel_ upon the race of governesses to put it into people’s
  heads they are to fall in love. I always, since I took a district in
  1836 felt the tenderest, most motherly pity for any misguided girl....
  I certainly never did or will read impure things in books or
  newspapers. I consider familiarity with impurity rubs the bloom off
  the plum, which never can be restored. Minds differ, some almost enjoy
  to read queer things. Impurity does not seem to me to find any
  response in you: you can come in contact and it runs off like
  quicksilver—leaves no print. I don’t think that is common.”

Footnote 25:

    The letter has not been preserved.

  “A letter from Elinor. She talks of enjoying your letters so much....
  I am very glad Plumptre has sent you a testimonial you like. I fully
  expected he would send (if asked) a _very_ handsome one.

  The world has many kind hearts, has it not?—none like my own child.”

And again, talking of a sermon she had heard:

  “I thought of my precious child when he pictured a strong character
  with exceeding depth of tenderness and gentleness.”

One understands more and more fully the fervour with which S. J.-B. was
wont to say in her later years,—“No one ever had such parents as mine!”
“How I _wish_ you had known my mother!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

One naturally treats S. J.-B.’s religious life at this time as something
apart from her questionings about dogma, for indeed the two belonged to
different categories of her being. The following is one of the few
letters of this period that have been preserved:

                                            8 p.m. March 17th, 1862.

        “DARLING MOTHER,—I know you care to hear all your child’s
  thoughts and hopes and feelings,—I know you will not condemn for
  conceit and egotism what might seem so to other people.

  I want to talk to you,—I feel so sure you want to hear. I want to tell
  you what a glorious Strength and Power has come out of all the sharp
  pain,—how I feel that I am a better person, a stronger and more real
  one, than I ever was before....

  Some one says that it is ‘not pain undergone but pain accepted’ that
  bears fruit an hundredfold. You know the acceptance has not been
  easy,—you know sometimes the flints have cut my feet deep enough, but
  thank God for two things—I never for any single moment lost the
  absolute certainty of Infinite Love and Wisdom ‘brooding over the face
  of the waters,’—the certainty of my Father’s arms around me,—and
  secondly that no suffering or pain could shake the love that has never
  been half so strong, so real, so ideal, so unselfish as now. I doubt
  if I ever half knew what being a friend was before,—I think I have
  earned the knowledge now—some of it.

  And, Mother, about my work. I cannot tell you the strong exulting
  feeling that seems to set God’s seal to my work, in that through all
  the personal agony I have held firm to _that_: at no moment, I
  believe, would I have purchased what I longed for most on earth at the
  price of that,—that I have felt through all ‘The light may be taken
  out of my life (and thank God how far that is from being so!) but the
  object never can!’ Don’t you know how the lines that reminded us of
  the oath upon our head, that bade us ‘never again our loins untie, or
  let our torches waste or die’ was the strong helpful thing through it
  all.

  And though I did believe in myself—and _thou_ ever didst believe in
  me, Mother!—yet so long as my work ‘walked in silken shoon’ and lay
  side by side with the pleasantest life possible for me, there was a
  certain thought about fair weather sailing,—a certain (not doubt, but)
  diffidence in looking on to the time of breakers,—a feeling as of
  David, ‘I have not _proved_ them.’ But now I feel that I have come to
  the proof,—that my armour has not failed in the battle,—something the
  sure happy confidence (farthest of all from presumption) ‘I can do all
  things through Christ which strengtheneth me.’ You can’t think how it
  ‘heartened’ me (you know that nice old word?) to find that truly as
  well as verbally my work does hold the first place....

  I am beginning to have hope, Mother! If I only suffer enough—and I
  don’t believe mine will ever be a smooth or easy life—I may yet be fit
  to _be_ the head for which I am looking so earnestly....

  But all seems centred in the one thought, ‘Lead Thou me on!’—or
  rather, not ‘me’ but ‘us,’—all the wanderers.

                                  Yours very lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

Not that S. J.-B. was ever conventional even in her religion. Here is a
characteristic extract from the diary of the same period:

  “You never have the common honesty, Jack, in this most private journal
  (they say hardly anyone _has_) to put down the thought if it crosses
  your mind ‘Well, I think I am rather a fine fellow’ or its equivalent.
  Because it never comes? Oh, dear your precious ‘humility’! I wish Miss
  W. could look into you:—_do_ you? Not you, you humbug!

  ‘Well, but,’ (retorts S. J.-B. accused) ‘I _do_ work with a single
  purpose,—I _have_ tried very hard, and, am sure, succeeded somewhat in
  this hard battle of these months,—what is the good of pretending to
  call myself names? Did not Job ‘maintain his integrity’?

  You coward! You must skulk behind Job. Looks respectable, does it? Say
  honestly ‘I do try harder than some people do,’ for in truth I believe
  that is all your conceit does amount to.

  I know from my heart I do recognize and reverence holiness and purity
  as far above mine as Snowden to a mole-hill. And _is_ that conceit? I
  don’t believe it is. No,—‘Not guilty, S. J.-B.’ Plead boldly, and
  don’t give in for shamefacedness. And besides you have no right to
  deny His triumph ‘Who giveth us the victory,’—by fighting modest on
  the sham. You _have_ won some victories. Thank God quietly, and
  pressing on to the things before. ‘I press towards the mark.’ God
  knows—and _you_ know—there are enough to win. Oh, _how_ far away lies
  doing even what is our ‘duty to do.’ But I don’t know that the realest
  soundest life limits itself to calling itself ‘miserable sinner.’
  Zacchaeus told Christ what he tried to do. He did not rebuke him as
  man does and say, ‘No, believe yourself utterly vile (for the glory of
  your Maker?)’

  There,—go to bed, S. J.-B.”

A few days later she recurs—as often—to the broken friendship:

  “... Well, I note markedly how, with all this light, all this growth,—
  respecting the suffering—(and I think all this would have brought a
  ‘right judgement’ too) I do not swerve one iota from my judgement of
  _facts_. I cannot conceive it one hairsbreadth more possible that any
  but a mental cloud can have worked in the way it has,—that under any
  possible circumstances my child, with her glorious nature and heart,
  can have acted as her image has....[26]

  But while I have at last manfully and honestly and cheerily faced the
  possibility of never seeing her again on earth—while I believe my
  loins are girded for the way quite irrespective of any future fate
  regarding her and me—while, having put my hand to the plough, God
  shall grant me grace never to look back even for her (who, God knows,
  is far enough before me) never to linger irresolute with thoughts that
  should and shall urge me to double speed,—yet it is curious how the
  whole fashion of my life shapes itself with the _arrière-pensée_ of
  being ready for her ‘at midnight or cock-crowing or in the morning,’—
  saving with the thought of her as well as myself,—looking at every
  path as it opens to see that it is wide enough to tread together if
  she joins me ere its end,—making the most of the working time now that
  a pause of rest may fall due whenever she comes to claim the ‘moon.’

  And I think, could she see my thoughts, my plans, my work, my
  resolves, she would not have them otherwise.”

Footnote 26:

  More than a year later Miss Hill wrote: “I wonder if it would be any
  comfort to you if you could know the infinite love the thought of you,
  specially of any pain of yours, calls up ... how passionately do I
  cling to a like trust in you that your pain may not be tenfold
  increased ... by any sense of desertion in spirit.... And yet, Sophy,
  this thought of me must fail you as time goes on, for you cannot see
  why I act as I do.... My love will be ready for you when He who is
  teaching us both shall bring us together again.”




                               CHAPTER X
                                GERMANY


It was perhaps well that an interesting new factor came into S. J.-B.’s
life at this moment. Miss Elizabeth Garrett (afterwards Mrs. Garrett
Anderson, M.D.) had made up her mind to be a doctor, and, in the teeth
of many difficulties and much opposition, was striving to obtain the
requisite education and prospect of examination. A great effort had been
made to get the examinations of London University opened to women, but
the resolution (brought forward by Mr. Grote) had been negatived by the
casting vote of the chairman—the vehement feeling shown by the
opposition being, in the opinion of the proposer, quite out of
proportion with the cogency of the arguments brought forward.

Miss Garrett had been in correspondence with S. J.-B. for some time as
to the nature of the prospects in Edinburgh, in case London University
should fail, and after talking the matter over with Mr. Begbie and other
friends, S. J.-B. urged her to “come and see.” Small prevision had
anyone concerned of all that they were to see in Edinburgh a few years
later.

  “Miss Garrett and her strength!” writes S. J.-B. in her diary on May
  19th, “making me break the 10th commandment. She doing Trigonometry,
  Optics, etc. Running where I crawl!”

And on the 20th:

  “Today Miss Garrett’s business. Wrote about ‘Commission.’ Twice to
  [Royal] Circus with very sore feet. Mrs. Darts, friend of Lord
  Ardmillan. Lady Monteith (Lord Advocate). Argyle. Hope she will come.
  It will be everything to have her to help a little if I can.”

  “May 29th. E. G. coming tomorrow,—sent her off a telegram this
  afternoon in case she might stay another day for the report I
  promised, and so lose tomorrow’s appointment with Balfour, whom I saw
  today with that splendid man, Begbie, who went down last night and
  this morning with me, and is to arrange with Newbiggin tonight for an
  appointment for her. My sore foot quite lame and not helpful for this
  bustle. However I believe I shall have done a bit of real work for
  her, and, as I said to Begbie, if there _are_ such people, ready to
  face such an ordeal let’s help them in God’s name. One great obstacle
  the (sometimes) ‘faux air’ of consideration for ladies’ delicacy.
  People don’t seem to see how that is _her_ affair. Besides she _has_
  faced it: it’s a day too late.”

How familiar all this talk was to become some half dozen years later!

Miss Garrett remained in Edinburgh for a fortnight, and during that
period the canvassing went on. Mr. Burn Murdoch used to say that, when
the two young women went about, interviewing great ladies and important
citizens, considerable surprise was expressed that Miss Jex-Blake was
not the applicant. She was so tall and high-spirited, with great
flashing dark eyes, while the real heroine was small and almost pretty,
and fair.

Strangely enough, S. J.-B. was not at all fired at this time by Miss
Garrett’s example. She meant to be a teacher, and medicine as a
profession did not tempt her in the least. She had her doubts even about
the value to herself of a University degree in Arts (supposing it could
be had!) although Miss Garrett and Miss Emily Davies were both anxious
that she should be of their number. “Chiefly I want you to make up your
mind to obtain the University degree,” writes Miss Garrett. “You are one
of the few who could do so pretty soon, and it would take most women a
year and a half or two years to prepare for the Matriculation.”

In any case the opportunity did not arise. The following letter to Mrs.
Burn Murdoch explains the situation:

                                                   “June 21st, 1862.

  DEAREST DORA,

  I do not know whether we are to look upon the result of the
  Physicians’ meeting most as a defeat or as a triumph,—the motion ‘to
  consider the question of admitting Miss Garrett’ was negatived by 18
  votes to 16,—very disappointing as regards immediate results, but very
  much as a victory for the principle, just as at London University. You
  see they have _not_ refused to admit,—only postponed the question
  indefinitely, so that, when time and opinion have been brought to
  bear, they can again entertain it without inconsistency.

  In the meantime the expedition to St. Andrews was very successful,—Dr.
  Day and Principal Tulloch were both warmly favourable, and it seems
  quite probable that Miss Garrett would be admitted to the University
  there,—only unfortunately you see there is no medical school there,
  and so it would be but half a solution to the difficulties as she
  couldn’t get ‘nice little subjects’[27] there....

  I have only just come to anchor after some 36 hours’ incessant
  trotting about, etc., so I daresay my intellects are ‘even weaker than
  usual’ as C. A. would say.

  I suppose I may now thank you again on paper for all your help, dear
  Dora. You can’t cough me down so conveniently. You don’t know how much
  you have helped me through.

                                           Yours affectly,
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

Footnote 27:

  Talking of the difficulties in the way of Practical Anatomy, someone
  had suggested that Miss Garrett should get ‘nice _little_ subjects.’

Previously to this decision, S. J.-B. had published sensible letters on
the subject in _The Scotsman_, _The Daily Review_ and other papers. She
also drafted an amusing letter in reply to her own, supposed to have
been written by one of the retrogressive “unco guid.”

  “Well, it was grand fun,” she says in her diary, “and, if it had got
  in, might have played very well; but the chief temptation was the
  immense fun it would be. E. G. and I both thought we could command our
  faces. Her sister opposed, but we agreed, ‘No harm. We don’t sign to
  it,—and it’s what some might say; and, if the _Review_ puts it in,
  it’s their look-out. It’s so weak, it can’t do harm that way.’ She
  said, ‘Don’t let me know about it.’ I said she was very much like
  ‘Tom, steal the apple, and I’ll have half.’

  Well, we agreed to send it and no harm done. I went to bed. I wasn’t
  quite content, yet I didn’t see any exact wrong,—and it was _such_
  fun!...

  Then somehow those dear eyes fixed themselves on me and I felt their
  sad grieved look. I can’t, I can’t,—they would grieve,—‘Oh, Sophy!’

  For a minute I went back,—‘Nonsense, no harm,’—then—

                  ‘Let all thy converse be sincere,
                  Thy conscience as the noonday clear,’

  and those words ‘righteous altogether’ rang in my ears....

  I went out to the sitting-room and sat down to write, and my first
  words to E. G. were, ‘Oh, I’ve annihilated the Review paper; it’s not
  righteous altogether.’ She said instantly, ‘No, I’ve been thinking in
  the night. I was going to advise you not to send it.’

  My darling would be glad. God _bless_ her!”

  “‘Let all thy converse be sincere’: ‘and righteous altogether’.”

A real fighting life lay before S. J.-B.—a life in which she received
and gave hard blows, and lost sight sometimes in the dust and turmoil—as
a fighter must—of the right on the adversary’s side; but the words
quoted above were the rock on which she built her achievement. One sees
now that often when lawyers and other well-wishers thought her candid to
the point of stupidity, she was simply determined that her converse
should be sincere, simply striving to be righteous altogether.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Her great desire for years had been to fit herself for the work of a
teacher, to found—or assist at the founding of—a wonderful college and
(as the very height of her ambition) to be perhaps herself the
headmistress. As she had planned Sackermena of old, so now she drafted
detailed schemes of work, organization, finance. Such schemes, however,
have been so much more than realized by the work of others that it is
useless to quote them. She took a keen interest in the school at Bettws-
y-Coed, offered prizes, set delightful examination papers in general
knowledge, and wrote stimulating letters to some of the elder girls.
Long before this she had written in her diary:

  “Read the account of the College in Ohio for both sexes. Well, ‘Be
  thou but fit for the wall, and thou _shalt not_ be left in the way.’ I
  do trust some day to graduate there or elsewhere. But still the great
  thing is _to be able_; the actual fact matters little.”

The reader will recall, too, the letter to her Mother:

  “I am beginning to have hope, Mother! If I only suffer enough,—and I
  don’t believe mine will ever be a smooth or easy life,—I may yet some
  day be fit to _be_ the head for which I am looking so earnestly.”

Any girl in the present day who was fired with such enthusiasm would
have countless advisers ready and anxious to give the necessary
guidance. How different things were in S. J.-B.’s girlhood may be
gathered from the facts of her pilgrimage to Edinburgh and search for
education there. She wanted now to go farther afield—to study the state
of women’s education in France and Germany, and—after some considerable
hesitation—her Mother supported her in this desire. To her father,
however, the feminist point of view remained a sealed book—“Truly to
him,” she says at this time, “my whole life is as the ‘sight of dancers
to him who heareth not the music,’”—and many objections on his part had
to be overcome. Germany was so far away, and France was peopled with
Roman Catholics on the look-out to pervert Protestant girls.

  “While you are so young,” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake, “there will be a
  fearful struggle to make Daddy bear your going abroad. We belong to a
  Society for Governesses to protect them when they go for the
  language,—young women have been sorely tried by _bad_ R.C.s to make
  them perverts or corrupt them. And he has heard so much of this that
  Germany would be less terrible to him than Paris.”

  “Written to Mummy at length about Germany,” she says. “Oh, the weary
  kind of languor that deprecates work and talk! It seems almost too
  much to have to do what is so hard, and to have, too, to justify it to
  others.”

The letter to her Mother has been preserved:

                                                      “May 1st 1862.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        ... I had hoped that Germany was an accepted fact,—not only to
  you, but to my Father, as at his (or your ?) wish I took that before
  France, and at your’s before America.

  I believe, my darling, that I am trying to look simply and earnestly
  at my life simply as an instrument for my work,—and shaping the one to
  serve the other.

  I have long formed the conviction (which daily experience and the
  opinion of others strengthens) that best of all now for my object will
  be the devotion of years to the observation of other systems and the
  endeavour to glean everywhere materials for my future edifice. I
  believe that my work has come definitely before me as early as it did,
  with the express intention that I should make this use of years which
  later I could never recall.

  It seems to me the simplest verbal expression of the presenting our
  lives a holy sacrifice, as is our reasonable service, to say,—God has,
  I believe, given me this work. I have certain qualifications and
  facilities for it. I will give up my life first to perfect those
  qualifications and then to use them as He shows me how. So now my
  whole intention and bent is to go anywhere in the world where, as it
  seems to me on sufficient grounds, I may expect to learn most for my
  work,—to learn what will make me myself a better scholar and to learn
  what will most help me to organize (if organization falls to my lot) a
  better system here in England.

  If I am myself to be the head, I will make myself as good a one, God
  helping me, as He has put in my nature the material to make,—if I am
  to be a servant I will certainly be as thorough and complete a one as
  is in my utmost power. I do from the bottom of my heart pray God that
  on no failure may be written, ‘Had I worked more earnestly, more
  wisely, more diligently,—this had been avoided.’

  You know, Mother, the purpose of my life,—you know the consecration,
  as I trust, of every power to one aim,—you have helped me nobly,
  gloriously to keep it in view,—you have told me that ‘manfully to
  fight under His banner’ _is_ more blessed than ‘dreaming out life even
  on Mother’s shoulder’....

  Well, Mother, you know my object, you know my hope. Look for yourself
  and tell me if you see for its fulfilment any course to be adopted
  rather than the one which seems to me marked out. Look at the work and
  that alone. Look at my life merely as the instrument,—see how it may
  best be turned to account,—most solemnly it is my deepest desire to
  arrive at a true answer.

  What could I be doing that would as readily and as really forward my
  aim? In what way could I as usefully devote my time and power?

  I believe most earnestly that it is not to any one plan or scheme of
  my own that I cling,—show me anything better for my work—show me
  anything even that you yourself think as good for it (looking at it
  only) and I am willing, renouncing every present thought, to take the
  new into deep consideration, and trust to the guidance of the Light to
  show me which is my appointed path.

  But take the question by itself,—satisfy yourself whether you think I
  have judged rightly, as at least I have striven to judge honestly,—
  and, if you arrive at my own conclusion I think you will feel that
  _that_ is the only important thing,—that if we are enabled to
  ‘perceive and know what things we ought to do’ we shall also surely be
  given ‘power faithfully to fulfil the same.’

  As I have said often before, if you and my Father ever need me at
  home,—ever even desire my presence there,—I will relinquish for the
  time everything to that which I am sure God would have me hold my
  highest and dearest duty,—But I believe nothing else on earth must be
  suffered to come between me and my work, and, please God, nothing
  shall.

  I see ‘my Father’s business’ clearly before me,—help me, Mother,
  wholly to consecrate my life as I would wish, to it.

  As to all questions of detail, I think, darling, you need not be
  disturbed or anxious. Acting rightly, I am quite sure I shall be
  always cared for far more than I deserve. I think you have, and may
  have entire confidence in my practical common sense,—I think I have
  already shown that I am not very likely to get into difficulties. You
  have trusted me a great deal, Mother, have you had to repent it?

  You may be sure that I shall strive my utmost to do wisely as well as
  rightly—indeed the one cannot be without the other. I think, moreover,
  you will be almost certainly satisfied with my plans and
  arrangements,—I am sure I have ‘caution’ strongly developed. And,
  though it may seem more new to you, I am very unlikely to find in my
  new life as difficult circumstances as those in which I have already
  had to act. I think that you may have confidence that I know you trust
  me, and that I shall not fail your trust. I think you may believe that
  I shall know and think of your wishes.

  Then, as to any anxiety for myself. You have said much to me in the
  trials of the last months which I would ask you to repeat to yourself.
  You have told me to trust my darling in perfect faith to ‘Him who
  keepeth Israel’ and whose love you tell me is deeper and truer than
  mine. Can you not trust me to Him too?

  I think there were some circumstances which there are not here, which
  did not make it easier.

  And in truth, Mother, what is there to fear? If God (as I believe)
  needs my life to do a work for Him, He will surely keep it safely till
  that work is accomplished. If He does not, wherefore should one live?
  Could you regret for anyone you loved that they ‘in youth should find
  their rest’? When one feels completely how each of us is a link in
  God’s great chain,—how individual life and care sink out of sight, as
  hardly worthy notice. How one feels the whole object and end of life
  to be that God’s will should be done in us and by us in life and in
  death.

  And whether in one or the other matters _so_ little....

  You see, Mother, I have had very much lately to realise all this;—that
  time and distance,—that all severance—are things of time—and shall be
  cast into the lake of fire. That now we have to do God’s work, ...
  that here we are not even to look for the fruition....

  I have to cling very very earnestly now to principles,—I cannot see
  for myself,—my teachers are removed out of my sight,—I can only cling
  to the belief which is above and beyond all that that very sight and
  those very teachers were but instruments of the great Guide,—and that
  now without them, as before with them, ‘the Lord alone doth lead him.’
  As I said this morning, so it seems to me tonight the root and
  fountain of everything ‘The Lord reigneth,—let the earth rejoice.’

                                   Yours very lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

It is not to be supposed—nor desired—that all her letters to her Mother
were on such a plane. Doubtless the weary flesh and spirit found
expression often enough.

Of course that wonderful mother-heart never failed in sympathy, though
naturally the Mother’s mind did not know what the strain of a modern
woman’s life meant in those early days when circumstances were all
unadapted to meet the new demand. “Little darling shall have all the
rest I can help her to,” she writes about this time, “for greatly does
her troubled spirit need it.”

And for a few weeks S. J.-B. really settled down to a restful time at
home. “I am just now chiefly living in the garden and stable in my
waking life,” she writes to Miss Lucy Walker, “but there is a sufficient
portion _not_ included in that.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Miss de Dreux had recommended a family at Göttingen, who would
be glad to have an English boarder, and S. J.-B. arranged to go to them.
To the last moment before leaving home she was occupied in trying to
persuade the mother of a sick friend to let the invalid accompany her,
in the hope that change of air and scene might check the course of a
mortal malady. One cannot be altogether sorry—nor surprised—that the
mother refused.

So S. J.-B. started alone on July 21st, and crossed from London to
Antwerp. “Delicious, cool and pleasant passage—smooth and comfortable.
Beds on deck in a kind of room knocked up under the ‘bridge.’ Quaint
night,—with crashing machinery, flashing lights, rough voices,—
altogether weird and quaint.”

The choice of adjectives is curious, as it was not till many years later
that “weird” and “quaint” became the stock adjectives in the vocabulary
of the young.

She spent the night at Cologne, and went on next day to Hanover and
thence to Göttingen. She was pleased with her quarters, her hostess, and
her reception. What the family thought of her is another question, to
which the records furnish no answer; for she was still feeling worn-out
in body and mind, and nature simply insisted on a rest cure. She seems
to have made little effort even to learn the language, much to the
amazement of the elder daughter, who had enjoyed the advantage of a
conscientious visit to England. So weary, indeed, was S. J.-B. that she
actually chronicles the “great blessing” of being freed from Sundays for
a while—of having rest all days, and “Calvinism, separation, none.”

  “How peacefully came over me today ‘One sweetly solemn thought’ as
  they sat talking (I knew but a word or two) of someone found dead. How
  uncongenial A.P.’s remark, ‘I find these so sudden deaths awful.’ What
  she thought I don’t know, but I could not but say, ‘Oh, no!—going
  home?’

  August 18th. Everybody going ‘zu reisen,’—Rhine, Harz, everywhere. Ah,
  childie, if you would only come quickly, we could have such a tour!—
  Alps,—Mont Blanc,—Geneva,—Venice, wherever you would; in a few weeks
  it will be too late. Too late! For _that_. But truly all _is_ ‘in the
  fulness of time,’ and could we see and know, even our restless
  impatience would not hurry it....

  As to money, well enough. I really expect to clear £20 of my allowance
  this quarter. I have that and about £1. 15s. in hand for stamps,
  washing and wine to the end of the quarter, besides £9 for rent. How
  jealously I do watch it! Really between my tour, my E.E.U.,[28] and my
  distant college, I must look out that I don’t turn into a miser in
  earnest! I get such a trick of watching and scraping halfpence! And
  yet I don’t believe I should grudge them either if need were.

  And one must look to pence if one would do anything with pounds.

  Still, I believe of the two I have really more to look out against
  ‘nearness’ than extravagance. I was right enough when I told Frid
  (that poor little darling, I am sure her’s are ‘vicarious
  sufferings’)[29] that she need never fear my spending 1/2d. I did not
  see my way to.

  I expect, with my work, this is perhaps a fitness for it,—a surety
  against a great danger....

  “Today Lina and I reading English. Frau brought a young man out, and
  Lina shut up all books at once—for the benefit of his remarks, I
  suppose. I, rather wrath, took up Rawlinson.”

Footnote 28:

  Englishwoman’s Educational Union,—a society planned by S. J.-B., which
  should form a meeting ground for really qualified teachers, and also a
  means of registration.

Footnote 29:

  Miss Miranda Hill’s loyalty and devotion to S. J.-B. never flagged.

During these weeks of comparative idleness, S. J.-B. was making
enquiries as to a place where she could profitably study the position of
the education of girls in Germany. Finally she applied for the post of
English teacher in the Grand Ducal Institute at Mannheim.

As the Institution had embarked on a policy of strict retrenchment and
economy, this was refused, but she had quite made up her mind to become
an inmate in some capacity (as an ordinary pupil if necessary) and
finally she set out without announcing her intention, in a fashion that
recalls an adventure in the life of Lucy Snow in _Villette_.[30] The
condensed account of this in her diary could scarcely be bettered:

  “Sept. 13th. Saturday.[31] Left Göttingen at 5 a.m. with pleasant
  gifts from the children, and the famous glass knife from Frau B.

  The morning cold, dank and misty,—darker than mornings are here even
  yet, I think. As we came south, perceptible increase of heat, till,
  leaving a cold autumn at Göttingen, we found a hot summer at
  Frankfurt. Went to Pfälzer Hof,—clean, cheap, and civil. Had a bedroom
  opening on a balcony, and very good night considering,—though, as I
  lay down, the venture rose strongly before me,—quite alone,—without
  counsel,—having come 200 miles to a place which had already refused
  me,—with the slender chance of personal representation prevailing,—
  uncertain, even if accepted, whether I could do the work,—in fact
  feeling strongly ‘not knowing whither I went’ yet trusting, like
  Abraham, I ‘went forth’. So fell asleep, seeing all perplexities, yet
  laying my head very softly on the pillow, ‘Oh, Lord, in Thee have I
  trusted: let me never be confounded!’

  Well, I slept long,—breakfasted deliciously in my room,—dressed in
  black silk, etc., with no end of care, wrote a little note to Mother,
  almost to the beating of my own heart all the time.

  Frl. E. had promised to come at 11. I waited till 12,—then came Frl.
  H. and Frl. M. Walked with them to the Institut,—was shown into the
  ‘parloir’ and left. They fetched me again,—walked round the square
  garden with its high convent walls[32] (oh, how I remember those white
  berries!) Then out came Frl. von Palaus with her fine port and clear
  good eyes, and round hat. I told her how I wanted to study German
  education, and wished so much to enter here.

  She asked ‘mes conditions’. ‘Moi, je n’en ai pas, Mlle.’ She would
  ‘parler aux autres dames.’

  Marie M. was to show me the house. Then in Miss von Palaus’ room:—

  ‘Would I come again at four?’ ‘Certainly’. Then a series of warnings
  for my own comfort:—‘ Very simple here.’ ‘I most happy to hear it.’
  ‘Very plain little room.’ ‘I am no sybarite.’ ‘Mixed communions.’ ‘I
  only ask toleration for myself, and am most willing to give it.’ ‘But
  as to money!’ I leave it entirely to them,—any arrangement of theirs I
  agree to. Enfin I said I was sure to be more than content. I had no
  fears.

  ‘Would I stay and dine?’ ‘Very gladly.’ ‘Very plain food.’ I was no
  epicure, and sure to be pleased. So the result was, in fine, that I
  have never dined anywhere else since, and find my prophecy well
  fulfilled.

  After dinner talked to the governesses; they said how comfortable they
  were. I thought, ‘I only wish I were in your shoes,’ for I had only
  asked to come _anyhow_, as pupil or anything. Then Frl. von Gruben
  came from Frl. von Palaus:—A teacher (a Frl. von Endert) was absent
  from illness for 6 months (was it not wonderful?) would I take her
  place?—but (as the Institution was only just struggling straight again
  after its shocks) without salary? ‘Very gladly.’ How my heart leaped,
  though I spoke very quietly. What a chance for saving, if not gaining,
  money,—literally to earn my bread. Now I could hope for money for my
  E.E.U., for the £50 for Christmas /63,—perhaps for Bettws school,—
  perhaps for a tour!

  Well, again I saw Frl. von Palaus,—her face had satisfied me from the
  first. ‘Did I quite understand? Was I willing to have no salary and no
  expense?’ ‘Very gladly.’

  So off I went at 4 p.m., gay as a lark. Settled my bill, got a cab,
  and by 5 p.m. (less than 24 hours from my arrival) was established in
  my little cell at the G.D.I., Mannheim!—‘au comble de mes voeux.’
  Thank God!

  And now I have been here nearly a month,—already established as if for
  years, in full sunshine of content.

  At work again! And, thank God, with such strength for it! A new sap
  and strength in all my veins,—my heart in songs of gladness.

  The heavy burden seems to have rolled away,—the sting and bitterness
  quite gone; strength and power returned to my hand,—colour and
  brightness to my life. Again I understand ‘the thrill, the leap, the
  gladness’—again the sunshine has broken over earth. Now I go up and
  down the long corridors, catching with my hand at a great beam, in
  ‘superfluous energy’ again, (my darling!)—a smile over my whole face
  as I think I will tell her of my life in this weird old monastery—
  young bounding life all around—I myself no longer ‘going softly’.

  ‘Thank God! Thank God!’ I can say nothing else.”

Footnote 30:

  Mrs. Jex-Blake writes about this time,—“I feel such a real sympathy
  for the English teacher—Lucy Snow—it is quite a pity you haven’t it
  with you—I think your Institut and the Park and Ducal Palace tally
  very well with _Villette_. Fortunately you have no male tyrant like
  Monsieur Paul,—do you remember Miss Lucie being locked into an attic,
  with beetles, a rat, and possibly a ghost:—to learn in a few hours a
  part in a play?”

Footnote 31:

  The account is really written some weeks later, as there was great
  delay in the arrival of the box in which she had packed her diary.

Footnote 32:

  The building had originally been a monastery.




                               CHAPTER XI
                     LIFE AS A TEACHER AT MANNHEIM


To her Mother she writes:

                                                  “Sept. 15th, 1862.

  MY OWN DARLING,

        Though I must now be rather more economical of space (for I can
  send but 1/4 instead of 1/2 oz) I cannot resist beginning a fresh
  letter to you, having but just posted my last, with one also to Daddy.
  I am afraid Mr. Bevan must be again disappointed to learn that there
  is still no kind of prospect of starvation for me,—quite the contrary.

  I will tell you our plans as far as I know them yet. We get up, as you
  know, at 5.30 a.m., breakfast at 6.30, begin work at 7. At 10 we have
  bread handed round, then at one we dine, very well, I think.... At 3
  we teachers (!) have cups of coffee, and at 5 or 6 some grapes before
  going out for a walk. At 6 tea (or perhaps at 7) and then at 8.30 a
  regular meat supper. So you see we are not so _very_ badly off,—indeed
  it seems to me to be something going all day almost!...

  Mother, I can’t lie down without telling you of the very beautiful,
  soothing influence one thing has (perhaps unexpectedly) over me. I
  mean the perfect lovingness and charity in which we all of such
  opposite faiths live together, and have just knelt and prayed
  together. There seems to me something so inexpressibly touching and
  happy in it,—everyone seems so loving to the rest, so far from
  cavilling for ‘words and names’: each so absolutely free and all so
  far from seeking to proselytize. At meals we stand round the table,—
  ‘Nous voulons prier, mesdemoiselles,’ and in silence everyone together
  thanks God ‘in his own tongue’,—one marking only that some cross
  themselves silently and some do not. Then at night we kneel together,—
  we have a fine loving German hymn, and a text for us all,—words
  lovingly pronounced by our Roman Catholic head that yet every
  Presbyterian minister might say. There seems to me something so
  inexpressibly soothing in this union,—so far stronger than all
  differences. I can hardly tell you the rest and refreshment it is to
  me now, worn and weary as my spirit is. It struck me very much in its
  beauty tonight as Miss von Palaus pronounced,—‘There is but one name
  given under heaven among men whereby we may be saved’, and we all
  received it on our knees,—Protestants and Romanists, Unitarians and
  Trinitarians,—each ‘in his own tongue.’ Was it not beautiful how just
  that name bound us all together,—Christians,—seeking at least the
  spirit of Christ who loved us all,—our Master,—that we might ‘love one
  another’....

  I am charmed to learn the Scotch girl, Janet McDonald, has learned
  both Latin and Algebra,—both wonderful acquirements here,—and I look
  forward to perhaps doing some work with her, if she gets on well
  enough with other things.

  2 p.m. Tuesday. The politeness of these girls is really quite
  refreshing. Last night, going up to my room after dark, there were
  several girls at the candle-stand, and, when I asked for a candle, one
  of them lighted one, and, with a reverence and ‘Permettez-moi,
  mademoiselle,’ carried it the whole way upstairs for me in spite of my
  efforts to get hold of it,—it being quite out of her way.... 7 p.m.
  Well, Mother darling, I wonder if you can sympathize in my intense
  exaltation and delight at the—for the first time in my life—literally
  _earning my bread_,—something like ‘My First Penny’, you know. I have
  had my ‘surveillance de musique’, but am longing quite childishly for
  the commencement of my special work,—I see teaching all around, and am
  just wild to be at it. Can Mother understand and sympathize?

  Thursday 18th. My letter at last. I have been several times to the
  post in hopes of it.... Today I have had one lesson, and am just going
  to give another,—delicious! It’s really like oats to a horse who has
  been kept a year on hay. Miss Garrett was right enough when she said,
  ‘Get teaching!’ I quite laugh at myself to feel how radiant I am with
  delight at being again in harness.”

To Miss Walker she writes:

                                                  “Sept. 22nd. 1862.
                                                       Mannheim.

  DEAR LUCY,

        You will, I think, already have heard from my Mother that I
  _cannot_ now offer myself to accompany L. to Paris. I do not know if
  you are aware that three weeks ago I wrote to Mrs. B., urging her, as
  strongly as I knew how, to entrust L. to me for the winter, and
  offering to take her to any part of Europe which was thought best. I
  believe, at Mrs. Z.’s entreaty, Mrs. B. did consult some medical man
  on the subject, but I am sorry to say they confirmed her resolution of
  ‘keeping her under her own eye’—of course not understanding, as you
  and I think we do, all the circumstances.

  I therefore got so decided a refusal that even I felt further entreaty
  to be useless, and, giving up the point, I entered at once into a six
  months’ engagement as English Teacher at the Grand Ducal Institution
  at Mannheim, where I have now been just a week, and therefore, of
  course, no further change is now in my power as regards my own
  movements....

  I am much pleased on the whole with the kind of tone I find between
  teachers and pupils, and with the general principles, which, if not
  the very highest, are yet greatly superior to what you find in most
  English boarding schools.

  By the bye, before I say Goodbye, I must tell you what horror my open
  window at night (even now) occasions the natives! Having violent
  headache some time back, an old servant assured me it was ‘the
  window’, and since I have been here I have been entertained with the
  account of a gentleman who went mad, as I understand, entirely from
  sleeping with an open window! So now you see the fate before you as
  well as me! Besides that, the doctor here (more shame for him) assures
  me I shall get a fever!

  Goodbye, dear Lucy. Remember me to the B.s when you write.

                           Yours very sincerely,
                                                   S. L. JEX-BLAKE.”

And again to her Mother:

                                                  “Sept. 30th. 1862.

  MY OWN DARLING,

        ... It amuses me very much as a proof of how soon a habit is
  acquired (and also, I think, an evidence that it suits me very well
  indeed) to find that now, and indeed for a week past at least, I
  always wake of myself just at 5.30 a.m.,—usually just 5 or 10 minutes
  before I am called.[33] I wasn’t wrong about my power of adaptability,
  was I, Mother? Indeed I thrive greatly on hours, fare and all other
  circumstances; I have not been so strong for many months,—indeed now
  it is just a year. What a strange, grey, weird year!...

  You see idleness and listlessness is about the worst thing possible (I
  was feeling that in Göttingen): now my days are full, not only
  materially, but really, for it is the kind of employment that does
  fill and satisfy me. And, I suppose, next to idleness, the worst thing
  would be over mental fatigue.... It is, too, another advantage, which
  anybody else can hardly appreciate, to have my day mapped out for me
  with military exactness,—to find my work always ready before me, and
  quite definite and imperative,—yet making no demand on my strength
  almost—always pleasant and always changing.

  It would have been impossible to have planned a life suiting me
  personally more exactly to my finest need,—and the glory is that at
  the same time it is part of my work, and serving it very really and
  materially. I don’t suppose in that point of view either it would be
  possible to put my time to better advantage....

  You see, Mother, how you get my sunny day-dreams now, as you used to
  get the weary ones. I don’t know if everyone has words running all day
  long in their head as I have,—it makes a glorious song sometimes—
  silently enough, but running like a golden thread through daily work
  and labour, raising it all till ‘the parapets of heaven with angels
  leaning’ come full in view.... Do you remember George Herbert’s
  delicious poem—?

  ‘My Joy! my Life! my Crown! My heart was meaning all the day Something
  it fain would say,— And yet it runneth muttering up and down With only
  this,— My Joy! my Life! my Crown!’

  It is to me so exquisitely significant of the joy and peace that
  floods one’s whole being, but does not very readily find words, except
  in those already familiar to it, like those Psalm utterances,—or like
  sometimes fragments of our own dear Liturgy or hymns;—and I think that
  is perhaps one of the greatest uses and values of such things. In the
  deep struggle times, one of the things that helped me most of all was
  always those glorious words of consecration that reminded me of the
  cross on the brow ‘In token that thou shalt not be ashamed to confess
  the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under His banner
  against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and to continue Christ’s
  faithful Soldier and servant unto thy life’s end!’ And again, the
  Communion words about ‘ourselves, our souls and bodies’.

  Oh, dear, how one does write on! But I think it pleases Mother, and
  I’m sure it helps me....

  I fancy my darling will be pleased to get a kiss from her little one
  to welcome her in London, as she cannot see her knight at Shoreditch!—
  _dear_ old lady,—would she could! But, Mother, you would let Daddy go
  with you if you really _wished_ for anyone? I tell you, as I have told
  you a hundred times before, how gladly your child will stay at home
  altogether if ever Mother really wishes for and wants her there, or
  will come from anywhere at any moment as rapidly as trains can bring
  her, if only Mother wishes for her for any purpose or none.”

Footnote 33:

  She did not always find this quite so easy. On October 17th she writes
  in her diary: “Being all but late this morning, it is decreed that for
  one week from this time S. J-B. rises every morning while the stroke
  of the half hour and minute hand are ‘one and the same straight line.’

  “Now, Resolution:”

  It is scarcely necessary to say that Resolution responded to the
  appeal.

It is very unlikely that she gave those about her the impression of
being _dévote_: that never was her way. The “spikes” Miss Octavia Hill
referred to were probably in full evidence. In her diary she writes,—

  “A talk with Miss E. and Miss H. about the sacraments, and
  ‘preparation’. Miss Gruben instanced with horror,—‘In England a party
  the night before.’ I said, ‘The theatre, with all my heart.’
  Exclamations. ‘If I could not take the Communion half an hour after
  leaving the theatre, I would never enter it.’ Then found myself in the
  disagreeable position of apparent Pharasaism. ‘Wish I were so good,
  etc!’ or hints like that. Yet surely, Octa? If there is a time when we
  cannot kneel for the Communion, that time should be blotted out.
  ‘Living to God’,—how that blends and binds all life!

  Today dear Mrs. Teed. God bless her! Yes, surely,—now she would not be
  hard on ‘prayer for the dead’. Yet what a noble soul! Ah, if she had
  lived,—if I could have justified myself to her whom I so respected.
  But, as Dora says, she knows it all now! Perhaps her spirit sees and
  sympathises with mine that looks with such love to her footsteps gone
  before. In life she would have disapproved of some things,—now at
  least she will see motives. ‘I believe in the communion of saints.’...

  Just been reading C. Brontë. Moved me almost to tears. What honour and
  blessing to have dried some of those tears,—filled some void in that
  heart. And yet doubtless ‘He has fixed it well’. At least she and I
  and a multitude that no man can number all form portions of the Hosts
  of the Lord.... And it is the work—not our pleasure. The scattering is
  part of the benefit.

  Ah, the Land of the Leal! The banishment past,—the solitude,—the
  tears,—the struggle. In hoc signo. ‘The Lord shall wipe away all tears
  from off all faces’.”

At this time she was extraordinarily happy in her work.

  “How _can_ people paint a teacher’s life as always such a suffering
  one! My room now quite a little Paradise. Frl. von Palaus up about it
  again this morning.... Now only some ivy and a tin pot wanted!

  My Schematism [?] very light. Certainly they take a generously liberal
  view of ‘earning my bread’. Well, at all events it shall be _well_
  earned, if not largely. I’m half afraid of myself now that I have the
  responsibility of 25 English pupils. I am really very anxious to get
  them on so well and so rapidly as to convince the world of the wisdom
  of having an English teacher!”

How thoroughly she succeeded in this aim may be gathered from the letter
of one of her pupils written a few months later,—

  “We now have an English mistress. Miss Blake, and she gives us so many
  things to do that I am already too fatigued to entertain me any longer
  with you: she is an inhabitant of your land, and, if all people are so
  diligent there, it is a wonder that you are not all philosophers.”

Her diary abounds with shrewd and genial criticisms of her fellow-
teachers. Of one whom she rather disliked, she says:

  “Miss D. has greatly laughed herself into my good books,—such a cheery
  simple merry laugh. I don’t think anything very bad could hide under
  such a laugh at her age.”

And again,—

  “That good Frl. von Palaus! Well might I today liken her to a sunbeam!
  How she lights up the very house,—how bright burns her lamp,—yet how
  simply!”

No wonder her letters were a joy to the Mother watching at home.

  “Your letter has cheered me and done me good,” she writes on Christmas
  day, “taking away the clouds in a great measure, that would hang over
  a day that owed so much of its brightness to your dear presence; but
  truly, as you say, we have a far truer unity and a sympathy which I
  fear might never have come but through trial and separation.”

Life was not all spent on the mountain heights, of course. Even at this
time she had her ups and downs like other people. Here is one of the
“downs”:

  “Who is sufficient for these things? seems my whole cry today. I don’t
  know why especially, but I seem so oppressed with a sense of the
  greatness, the weight of my work,—and of my own miserable
  insufficiency for it. Oh, so weak and stupid and unfit! And it isn’t
  humility,—it’s just truth.

  I’m horribly showy,—always (voluntarily or not) deceiving people into
  a belief into talents I haven’t. Then I’ve will enough and would work,
  but no health or strength for it. That’s not your doing, S. J-B. ‘Hath
  not the Potter—?’

  Besides, you’ll never be called upon to do what you can’t. God will
  give you power or send another in your stead.... And ‘who is
  sufficient?’ ‘My Grace is sufficient’.

  Yet I am thankful, too, for even this fit of despair or at least
  downheartedness,—for I was fearing horribly, lest, my whole heart
  being bent on one hope and plan, I might be too far identifying _my_
  success with _it_, lest I might be seeking to win something for
  myself,—not simply to see God’s will done by me or without me. And
  from the bottom of my heart did go up, ‘Lord, put me aside utterly if
  need be!—and here, perhaps, the answer.’”

She did not always take her reactions so seriously:

  “Cold. Therefore rather cross and grumbling. Prowling about the
  corridors with shoulders nearly up to my ears, mind do. And I fool and
  sybarite enough to conjure up pictures of a certain dainty little room
  with blazing fire.... ‘Shame on ye, Gallants, wha ride not
  readily!’... Well, well, indeed it was not really a grumble,—only a
  John Bull growl. You don’t think I really give in an inch for such
  nonsense?

  No. Well, there, that’ll do.

  As well to grumble to my book as to poor small folk downstairs, who
  want bracing not enervating.

  Granted. But why either?

  Oh, now you’re infringing the liberty of the press! I may write
  anything that wells up.

  There, there!—pax.”

This is one of the many dialogues between “The Infantine” and “The
Estimable,” as she called them. Greatly did her Mother appreciate the
titles.

A few weeks later, after some words of yearning for a “comprehending
ear,” a “sympathetic hand,” she breaks off abruptly with,—“Heigh ho!
Shut up Grumbles! ‘a cussin’ and a swearin’ like that,’ as long coz
would say.”

Greater troubles were in store than those constituted by cold dark
mornings. No mention is made in the prospectus given above of holidays,
and Mrs. Jex-Blake in her letters complains much of the “No holiday”
system. Apparently the boarders only went home for a few days at a time,
and for months together S. J.-B. does not seem to have slept away from
the Institut for a single night. It was no wonder if, under these
conditions, teachers and pupils “got on each other’s nerves,” and among
Frl. von Palaus’ many qualifications was not that of being a strict
disciplinarian. When the novelty wore off, the girls, after the fashion
of their kind, began to try how far they could go with the English
governess. As may be imagined from her previous history, S. J.-B.,
though an admirable teacher, did not show herself particularly strong in
the matter of keeping order. The pupils found out their power of
“tormenting” her, and the delicacy of their feeling may be gauged by the
fact that on one occasion they gaily charged her with having “weeped in
church” (“False, by the bye, in fact,” she says in her diary). With
delightful _naïveté_ they summed up the things she could not do. She
could not sing, nor play, nor dance, nor paint, nor embroider?—“What
_can_ you do, Miss Blake?”

Of course she would have thought it unworthy of her to mention the
things she had done and could do. Moreover, for reasons given above, she
was spending a minimum of money, and vulgar schoolgirls drew their own
conclusions. She sometimes admits with remorse that she was hasty and
unjust in little things,[34] and, although there is no indication that
she ever fell into the tempests of passion that characterized her
girlhood, she owns that she often assumed a stony indifference, which,
of course, though she did not know it, was a great deal worse. All the
time (so her diary shows) she was almost agonizing over these children,
longing really to get into touch and fire them with her own zeal; she
did not scruple to talk to them seriously and individually about the
great issues of life; but when the magnetic influence of the interview
was over, they felt a certain inconsistency in her, a hastiness, a
failure to conform to conventional standards of right and wrong, a want
of equity, or at least of equableness, of which she herself was almost
unaware. “But oh, where is the special flaw?” she cries in her diary.
“Lord help me! ‘Thou wilt not pity us the _less_’—that fault of my own
forms my cross.”

Footnote 34:

  “I an’t _just_. There’s a fact. I’m sorry for it, but it’s true. As my
  sky is bluer or greyer, as I see, or think I see, more or less into a
  child’s character, the scale varies. Justice is blind no longer, but
  gives a chuck to one side or the other.”

In any case her pupils felt the flaw. Her conscientiousness, her zeal,
her fine uprightness were more or less lost on them, or so it seemed. A
cheaper form of goodness would have appealed to them more.

She never spoke of her home life and circumstances, and probably even
Frl. von Palaus had very little idea that the English governess was a
woman of family and position.

  “Oh, how weary I am after those hours of struggle internal and
  external!” writes S. J.-B. in her diary. “Almost like being tied to a
  stake,—so suffering, so helpless. And this I?—who used to fancy I had
  power to rule! Two months more will see me well nigh home I trust.
  Some faint foreshadowing of ‘Then are they glad because they are at
  rest.’ The thoughts of my green nest, and of the ruddy firelight, and
  the hymns at Mother’s knee very frequent in these days of struggle.”

She poured out the story of her failure to her Mother, and delightful
were the letters she got in reply:

  “(Miss v. Palaus) will miss my darling and her unselfish love terribly
  when she leaves.... Without any great vanity you must know that your
  hearty ready help must be most refreshing to her, and your wide-awake
  state must have a great influence over the Girls.”

  “I cannot believe that your work has been done as indifferently as you
  think. I believe you have always done what you could, and fought hard
  against feelings and every form of indolence or selfishness. Surely
  you could somehow raise some response to fun; only perhaps a good deal
  arises from your being English and they not understanding.”

In spite of all, however, the trouble went deep, and she chronicles
sadly in her diary that “neither moon nor stars for many days appeared.”
Oddly enough, she never seems to have entertained the idea of simply
giving in her resignation and going home. She entirely meant to serve
her time,—nay more,—to hold the position until some suitable person was
found to carry on her work. Certainly it was not the acquisition of the
language that served as an inducement to remain, for, throughout her
stay, she learned almost incredibly little. The whole of her very
limited energy was thrown into her teaching.

“The hearty praise pouring in for the girls’ progress, ought to comfort
me there,” she says. “I suppose they almost certainly have got on more
rapidly than with 9 teachers out of 10.”

One is glad to learn that months before she left Mannheim, the tide of
popularity turned; and, although even she attributed the change in great
part to the fact of her having worn a “ravissant” gown at the School
Carnival Ball (a gown which she had worn as a bridesmaid in England) she
was glad to respond by expanding good spirits to the diminished
pressure. So the pretty frock served its turn. “There’s no doubt about
it that opinion altogether has veered round widely about me. I think I
am rather popular now,—I certainly _was_ thoroughly the contrary.”

She was, until the later years of her life, wanting in sympathy with the
more or less innocent and pardonable vanities of youth, and yet during
this period she did sometimes cry out for a more vivid life,—or rather
for days and hours of greater vividness to break the monotony of the
working life she had deliberately chosen. It was one of her ambitions to
be duly presented to Queen Victoria, for whom throughout life she had a
great admiration, but the ambition was never realized.

“Darling,” writes her Mother, in answer to a very human cry, “your young
bright days are nobly spent for the Lord. Shall we offer Him that which
costs us nothing?... There always has been (though probably not
necessarily) so much that is false, impure and hollow connected with
most of what are termed amusements that you would soon loathe them, and
feel work and even discipline more satisfying.” But never for one moment
from her twentieth year onwards did S. J.-B. ask for amusement and
vividness _in place of_ work and discipline.

She might have found recreation and stimulus in the music of Germany,
but her chief limitation was on the side of Art. Music did not appeal to
her, and, although one of her greatest gifts was the possession of a
beautiful speaking voice, with a perfect natural production, she could
not sing and had no ear for music at all. She argues with herself on the
subject,—“Surely singing, for instance, is a wholesome and good
amusement. Surely it is right that some should contribute it for others?
Yet, perhaps, mere amusement, even for others, is not a life-work for
anyone? At least unless _as a duty_. So few sing, as Fra Bartolomeo
painted, ‘on their knees’.”

This is estimable enough so far as it goes, but artistic perception is
wanting, and throughout life she never got much farther in this
direction, though she always loved to hear a simple congenial song sung
by one she loved. “Do you care for the ‘unlearned praise’?” she used to
say. When she quoted, as she sometimes did, “’Tis we musicians who
know,”—it was not of music she was thinking.

All through this period her main preoccupation was with religion. She
was reading, among other things, the _In Memoriam_ and Robertson’s
Sermons, and she continued to read them till the end of her life. Her
volumes of Robertson are falling to pieces with sheer honest careful
lifelong use, and many of the sermons are marked with a date and with
initials to remind her of the times when she shared her treasure with
some special friend. Assuredly, in the words of her loved quotation,
Robertson “found her.” Living, as she was at this time however, mainly
among Roman Catholics, she felt—as so many have felt—a real desire to
share their communion.

“I mean to study Romanism as thoroughly as I can,” she says. “Hitherto I
have not by any means found, as C. Brontë, my repugnance to Roman
Catholicism increased by close view.”

She was anxious to get a proper breviary or missal, and apparently
finding this difficult in Mannheim, she wrote to her Mother to send her
one. That wonderful old lady! She can’t have enjoyed the commission, but
she set about the fulfilment of it most loyally. And, oddly enough, she
too met with many difficulties. She declined to be put off with _The
Garden of the Soul_, and finally she writes:

  “I despair of getting a satisfactory breviary, unless you can send me
  definite orders for Treacher to procure one. Marvellous rubbish at the
  _only_ R.C. shop. They were _very_ anxious to fetch the R.C. priest!—
  to help me,—‘were sure he was within.’ Fancy if Daddy had come by,
  with the carriage at the door and I inside in deep conversation with
  said Priest!...”

No, there never was such a Mother! Her openness of mind shows itself in
a hundred extracts. “I do not fairly know Thomas à Kempis,” she says.
“The passage you quoted was very grand and beautiful.” “I wonder if you
will care for my extract from Pusey in the ‘Times’. I always think there
is such a chastened, disciplined spirit in what he writes,—no pepper,
nor vinegar.” “If I were obliged to have a great deal of company, I
should, I doubt not, feel ‘Lent’ a grand repose and comfort; as it is, I
am disposed to kick at it as artificial.”

And she is no longer afraid to express her loving appreciation.

  “I don’t call you so much a ‘sweet-tempered’ as an ‘excellent-natured’
  girl,—most unselfish, energetic, and at all times ready in the behalf
  of others. A regular ‘_sweet_ temper’ is rarely found with very strong
  deep feelings.... I don’t think there ever was such true love as
  your’s—unless it be her’s under disguise. You would not now be able to
  stand alone as you do had circumstances not separated you. God has two
  great works,—one for her, one for you.”

  “I am quite sure, by pouring out your heart to me, you help me on as
  well as yourself. You bring before me such strengthening texts and
  poetry, and our hearts get so very closely knit. It may seem selfish
  to say so, but your sorrows have greatly enhanced my joys by bringing
  us close, and, as it were, entwining us inseparably.”

In a fine sermon on _Old and Young_, the late Bishop of Oxford dwells on
the “tragedy going on in the life of many a home, ... as father and son
or mother and daughter grow conscious, sometimes with silent pain, and
sometimes with scarcely veiled resentment, of an ever-widening
severance, a perpetual and almost irrevocable ebbing of sympathy and
trust.” If any further proof were needed than has already been given of
the wholeheartedness with which this mother and daughter resisted that
tendency to severance and realized the sympathy and trust, it may be
found in the correspondence that follows:

                                     “Jan. 23rd, 1863. Friday night.
                                             and Jan. 24th.

  MY OWN DARLING MOTHER,—I’m right sorry you didn’t get your baby’s
  first morning greeting,—I went out on purpose to post the letter on
  Friday that you might. It’s very tiresome too that the other little
  messenger didn’t reach you,—however Mother knows it was sent, and it’s
  useless to risk sending more the same way; you shall get it in
  duplicate when I come home,—whenever that is.

  Sometimes I think I ought to stay here till I have mastered my
  difficulties and learned to rule,—then again I see that years and
  years of my life will be but a learning of that lesson, and the great
  thing is to see how to dispose of them most _wisely_, not in obstinacy
  or in self-consenting even on a point like that. Besides month after
  month of unbroken work _does_ come to tell on one, specially if one
  starts not over strong; and I feel myself looking forward with
  significant expectation to the coming rest (and still more,
  _refreshment_ time) again,—to say nothing of seeing faces and hearing
  voices that I fancy may too not be sorry to see and hear mine again. I
  am watching the now really lengthening days almost like a
  schoolchild,—indeed I am tremendously much of a child yet, Mother,—and
  thinking how the days and weeks roll on and bring the homecoming
  nearer. Even if I returned _here_, I must have a holiday and not a
  very short one,—for I have got a good deal _used_ one way or another,—
  though now I am again delightfully cheery and strong,—and able to work
  twice as well among the children when a laughing word comes instead of
  a weary one; and _they_ feel it too, I am sure.

  I shall be very curious to read Colenso’s book,—will you send me its
  name, please? It is so very easy a way to get up a laugh (which
  somebody calls the Devil’s keenest sword) against opinions or people
  you don’t agree with, by such a jest as that Colenso wants to turn
  ‘the Bible into Rule of Three sums’,—so much more easy than
  justifiable or Christian. It’s just a word which, said of a great
  Mathematician, is sure to ‘take’ whether there is any or no sense in
  it. People like to laugh and repeat what sounds sharp, and prove their
  own superiority (?) to such men as they can’t hope to get within 100
  miles of in attainments.

  Besides in a certain non-sneering sense, it may really be true without
  inferring any blame. (I wonder if you like me to discuss the question
  or not? If not, just tear up the next page or two unread, that’s all.)

  The Rule of Three (as it is most absurdly called) is perhaps the
  purest form of development of the principle of Cause and Effect,—the
  principle that rules the world and lies at the root of all science and
  all logic. You see an effect,—it _must_ have a corresponding cause.
  You are aware of a cause,—you imply with certainty answering effect.
  ‘To look through Nature up to Nature’s God’—is strictly (if you choose
  so to call it) a Rule of Three sum. Again,—‘These are Thy works,
  Parent of Good,—Thyself how wondrous then!’—a pure syllogism,—or, if
  you please, Rule of Three sum—thus:

                I. The author must be greater than his
                   works.

               II. God’s works are great beyond our
                   conception.

              III. How infinite then their Maker!

  Or, more beautiful and more sacred than all,—‘He that spared not His
  own Son ... how shall He not with Him freely give us all things?’

  The form of reasoning that St. Paul did not disdain to use need hardly
  be a reproach to Colenso.

  God Himself _does_ give us minds and does bid us use them,—_He_ is not
  afraid of His truth standing in the sunlight, though some of His
  people are. Robertson draws out very beautifully how the Christ never
  sought blind credence,—superstitious belief even in His words because
  they were _His_. He never said ‘I say so,—there’s an end,’ (as so many
  of His followers like to put in His mouth). ‘If I say _the Truth_, why
  do ye not believe me?’—again, more exquisite still in its loving
  humility,—‘Though ye believe not me, believe the works’,—‘Search the
  Scriptures’ etc. etc.,—always praying them to test Him by His works,
  by the voice of their own conscience, by the testimony of their sacred
  books,—continually protesting against the idea of His own assumption
  of sovereign power, ‘I know nothing of Myself.’ But here I’m getting
  on another subject, and I’ll stop.

  But I always get greatly interested in a discussion about the Bible,—
  people seem to me often so hopelessly superstitious and illogical
  about it, and so to miss its truest, most blessed meaning.

  It always seems to me that the question divides itself into two
  perfectly distinct parts,—regarding, so to speak, the spiritual and
  temporal part of the Bible. The first is entirely without the province
  of the intellect or the reason,—‘Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, ...
  but God hath revealed them unto us by His spirit.’ As Colani says (I
  think, indeed, it was him I quoted before) it is not a question of
  logic or of evidence whether we believe ‘the sacrifices of God are a
  broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God Thou wilt not
  despise!’,—the _certainty_ of its truth is self-evident to us; we are
  absolutely sure the moment we hear the words that the All-Good
  rejoices in repentance and not in blood. It is the word of God from
  without speaking to the Spirit of God within us ‘whose temples we
  are.’ In Coleridge’s forcible words, ‘it _finds_ us’,—it pierces
  through ear and brain irresistibly to the spirit of every man. Yes,
  _every_ man; there is not one in the world however debased who _could_
  doubt whether God preferred a broken heart or a costly gift. He may
  not think about it, he may let the words pass by him, but, receiving
  them at all into his mind, he _cannot_ doubt....

  Feel,—suffer, and words like those bring their own proof; let them
  once _enter_ and you need not ask whether their truth is received or
  not. ‘Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God.’ We _know_
  it is so; no one in the world could really doubt for one second
  whether holiness or impurity brings the man to God,—to _see_ Him....

  In all this the whole mass of ‘Evidence’ goes for absolutely nothing.
  If the Bible had never been heard of to this moment, and I picked it
  off a dunghill, _those_ words and truths would just as irresistibly
  transfix and ‘find’ me as a two-edged sword.

  But since, as Pulsford says, ‘Most people get their faith through
  their heart, not through their head,’—there are thousands of God’s
  children who, seeing and feeling the infinite beauty and pricelessness
  of these words and truths,—but _not_ seeing fully their infinite
  omnipotence, their absolute impregnability,—fancy that to preserve
  from the slightest danger what is to them so infinitely precious, it
  is necessary to claim for the whole casket the same authority and
  value that the jewel claims for itself: and then, because this claim
  does not and cannot maintain _itself_, they rush to arms for it and
  brand as ‘rejectors of the Bible’ some who, like your child, find in
  its words the very deepest blessings of existence....

  I don’t know enough about it to have an opinion worth anything, but as
  far as I can judge, it seems to me the result of open fair criticism
  rather establishes than disturbs the veracity of all Jewish history as
  given in the Bible since the time of Moses, while it does not seem to
  me possible satisfactorily to defend the authenticity of the account
  of the Creation and probably the first few centuries,—both from the
  certainties of Geology and probabilities of history, and also from the
  internal evidence.

  But what _is_ the leading point to me is the folly of trying to arrest
  honest investigation about anything,—and the especial mistake of
  fancying that _any_ result arrived at could touch the real standing
  and position of the Bible. For myself, I can say in all sincerity that
  if not one fraction only but the whole biblical history were proved to
  be utterly unreliable and mistaken, it would not make the difference
  of a straw’s weight either to my life or my faith,—it is not as a
  rival of Herodotus that I have valued the Bible,—the destruction of
  the historical credit of the one would matter just as much to me as
  that of the other. We might lose some grand illustrations of God’s
  love and care, but the truths would remain, and the history of any
  century, of any land, of any man, leaves Him not ‘without a
  witness’....

  Well, Mother, it has indeed been more than a page or two,—if it pains
  or wearies you do but burn it; but I am glad from the bottom of my
  heart to tell you honestly what and why I believe on a subject where I
  fear Mother is a little afraid of me;—to put at least calmly and
  clearly before you other thoughts and words than those you hear
  oftenest,—not that you may accept, but that you may consider them. For
  you as for me, Mother, God ‘shall lead us into all truth’.

  Sunday. You asked me about Miss v. Palaus. She isn’t ill now, but I
  think she suffers altogether from this terrible ‘no holiday’ system.
  Think what it is to go on for 26 years!—with only a week’s break at a
  time, and that perhaps once a year.

  Dear, I broke off abruptly, it occurring to me to apply the principle
  of how bad it was to go on without change and how one was bound to get
  all one could; also that it was a bright day and that I was no use
  where I was, so had better go to Heidelberg....

  The sermon was about sorrow and bereavement, commonplace enough and
  disagreeable sometimes, but chiming in in bits with some thoughts of
  mine. For one thing he said it was a duty to rouse oneself after a
  time and go back to one’s daily work. Now, Mother, you know better
  than anyone how I have strained every sinew to take up my tool again
  and work on, from the very first months even. But there is a certain
  state of things which I can’t honestly conceal from myself which makes
  the struggle in some ways a very terrible one.

  I am sure ‘what is is best’, and I don’t say one word in the form even
  of sorrow, only of perplexity. But, Mother, I haven’t the least the
  mind I had,—I have waited and waited to see if they would not waken
  but now for nearly 18 months my mental powers seem struck with stupor.
  It’s no use urging them,—they don’t answer the call. The love and
  power of mental work seem to have faded away. I just jog on from day
  to day with sense enough for daily life perhaps,—but I don’t seem to
  get any nearer any return of intellects. I won’t say it would have
  been _better_—because if it would, it would have been so—but I don’t
  doubt if I had had a crushing physical illness last Xmas, the agony
  would have exhausted itself and I probably risen from a brain fever as
  strong as ever,—but no physical relief coming in this form, the whole
  weight seems to have fallen on my brain and paralyzed it. My whole
  mind sometimes seems a blank,—the children ask me simple questions and
  I know nothing. Sometimes it’s hard work to crush back the tears when
  it is so.

  You know those terrible (they did frighten me horribly) kinds of
  delusions that showed me a white dog or a wheelbarrow just when I was
  going to pull up when driving you.

  Well, Mother, it’s no use to go on,—no use even to say ‘What am I to
  do?’ One feels sure in truth that God ‘will find a way’ and show it to
  me....

  But the time goes on and on, very many months already, and yet no
  streak of light comes from any quarter. One does not see the faintest
  sign of change, and yet one cannot see how things are permanently
  possible as they are.

  You don’t think it is any want of will or effort in me, Mother? Surely
  God ‘reaps not where He has not strawed’.

  Oh, Mother, Mother, what it will be to rest the tired stupid old head
  on your bosom again.

  80 lessons a week is too much I’m afraid for Ruth, but I can’t pretend
  to look after her when I’m in Germany,—and perhaps nobody gets on much
  the worse for that fact. It’s a very forcible rebuke to one’s vanity
  to find _how_ little anybody is missed from anywhere, (except in their
  Mother’s hearts, darling) and one or two others perhaps. Yet that’s a
  hasty way to speak. I believe I do have a great deal of love from more
  people than I deserve....

                                    Yours lovingly ever,
                                                               SOPH.

  Please tell me by what post this arrives.”

An able letter surely, for one whose “intellects” were worn out. Of
course she fails to realize how different her whole outlook on life
would have been if she had found the Bible for the first time
accidentally in mature life, “on a dunghill” or elsewhere. The Mother’s
reply is surely at least as able:

                                              “Thursday, Jany. 29th.

  MY OWN DARLING,

        Your letter did not reach me till first post this morning. I
  quite believe Truth will in itself bear coming to the light, without
  suffering. But I do fear there are many minds, heads and hearts
  without one sentence of heavenly truth upon which to fall back for
  comfort, which may be irreparably injured by the doubt and contempt
  thrown upon historical parts; and thence deduce, ‘All is false, and
  cannot do me good or help me in any way.’ I think I must send you the
  last ‘Cornhill’ come in this afternoon. I imagine the critique in it
  is from a man who would favour free enquiry,—a son of Dr. Arnold’s,—
  Matthew Arnold. He says, ‘I censure Colenso’s book because, while it
  impresses strongly on the reader that the Pentateuch is not to be read
  as an authentic narrative; it so entirely fails to make him feel that
  it is a narrative full of divine instruction in morals and religion,
  etc., etc.’ I ought to have stated that all this comes in in a
  critique upon Stanley’s ‘Lectures on the Jews’, which Arnold greatly
  admires. Now that February is at hand, I find that the _January!_
  Macmillan has an actual critique upon Colenso. Shall I send it to you?
  I have not read it. I asked Hetty if she had. She considers it severe
  on Colenso. I think I shall send it.

  Your long dissertation did not annoy or weary me at all, indeed it
  rejoiced mother’s heart. You seem to have all you want to _live_ and
  die upon. What can you need more? Certainly I have individually
  _great_ comfort and enjoyment from seeing Christ as my Substitute in a
  manner that I apprehend you do not. If it be, as I suppose, needful, I
  am sure your loving Father will give it you in His good time. As to
  your mental powers, it is _very strange_. We can only wait patiently
  and say, ‘It is the Lord. Let Him do what seemeth Him right’. I don’t
  suppose the important precious discipline you are going through could
  have been produced in time of full mental vigor. That will assuredly
  return if for your real good. Meanwhile you may well trust Him who has
  done such great things for you. I long as much as you to have you
  resting on my bosom. Rest you _must_ have: refreshment of spirit I
  pray you may have.... Nothing, as you say, invalidates the grand
  truths responded to from within. At all times the Eternal God is thy
  refuge and underneath are the everlasting arms.

                         Your loving Mother,
                                                   M. E. JEX-BLAKE.”

A fortnight later she writes:

  “Only fancy, Daddy has been reading Colenso’s book!”




                              CHAPTER XII
                     VARIOUS PROJECTS AND VENTURES


“Rest you must have: refreshment of spirit I pray you may have.”

So wrote Mrs. Jex-Blake in the end of January; but even the physical
rest was destined to be long delayed. As explained in the previous
chapter, S. J.-B. did not at all draw to the idea of deserting her post
before a suitable person arrived to supply it, and that suitable person
was not easy to find. So the months went by, and it was not till April
was well advanced that all arrangements were made for her departure
within a fortnight. She was wild with delight at the prospect of getting
home, but the fates were unkind. On May 3rd she writes in her diary:

  “Well, I do feel most uncommonly seedy,—no doubt about that,—having
  just waded through my packing somehow, and ‘bitterly thought of the
  morrow’, and how many leagues and hours lie between me and a snug bed,
  clean sheets and beef tea. But, somehow or other I do mean to push
  through and trust my luck for falling as usual on my feet, catlike.
  Specially anxious, by the bye, not to be spied out here or it’ll all
  go down to the baths”—she had been bathing in the Rhine before
  breakfast—“as I daresay this heavy cold may, which reduces me to, or
  below, the level of the inferior animals.

  Well, three days hence! Who can’t hold out that time?”

She certainly did her best to “hold out,” dragged herself out of bed,
and went downstairs looking like “_une déterrée_,” so Frl. v. Palaus
said. She refused to see the school doctor, believing that he would
prevent her going home, and also that he would insist upon her keeping
her window shut. For some reason unknown Frl. v. Palaus resolutely
declined to have an English doctor sent for, and so things went on for a
day or two till the patient agreed that the German doctor should be
allowed to say whether her throat was “of importance.” Whether he was
allowed adequate means of arriving at a diagnosis we have no means of
knowing. In any case his answer was in the negative. Two days later the
patient was obviously suffering from a sharp and typical attack of
scarlet fever.

It really was a blow, poor child! She was so longing for her Mother, “My
year’s work just done _so_ painfully,—and now my cruse snatched from my
lips. It is hard, _hard_! I didn’t one moment doubt it was right,—only
very hard.” Then like an audible voice came the reminder of the inner
light, and all pain went.

It does not necessarily follow that she proved a very easy patient,
though she tried hard to be reasonable, and even to keep her window shut
at night, which was quite unreasonable. The whole situation was
sufficiently trying for Frl. v. Palaus; and S. J.-B., although she and
her nurse became attached to each other, got little of the petting which
throughout life she so greatly valued when just the right person
bestowed it. Her Mother’s letters as usual were an infinite comfort, and
her Father was with difficulty prevented from sending out a London
physician to look after her, and, in due time, bring her home.

She made a good recovery, and was allowed to start for England on the
27th, when an English lady was engaged to accompany her. “Very like
getting out of purgatory into heaven,” she says. “The dear old folks!”

Her Father was nervous about infection, and, fortunately for him, a
trifling driving accident some four or five days after her return forced
her to consult “Sam Scott.” “He couldn’t swear me free of fever, but
said, ‘If you meet my children on the cliff, you may kiss them.’”

                  *       *       *       *       *

So S. J.-B. settled down once more to the old life at home, not without
occasional “cataracts and breaks,” for her Father did not advance with
the times, and hers was not the only hasty temper in the family. But she
never doubted that a definite work was in store for her somewhere.

Her diary is sometimes amusing reading. To an acquaintance who—after
visiting at Sussex Square and hearing the intimate fireside names—wrote
to her as “My dear Jack,” she replies,

  “DEAR MISS D.,

        Firstly I don’t like being called names, and secondly I have
  been overwhelmingly busy,—which two reasons must excuse my not having
  earlier sent you the address.”

  “I agree with Macdonald,” is her connotation. “The only argument some
  people understand is being knocked down, and it’s cruel to withhold it
  from them.

  And a very mild knocking down this time.”

  “July 8th. Annette’s Sunday School. ‘The outward and visible sign in
  baptism?’

  ‘Please, ma’am, the baby, ma’am.’”

That her lamp was not burning dim one gathers from the letter that
follows. It relates to the young invalid college friend whom she had
wished to take with her to Germany:

                                                   “Nov. 15th. 1863.

  DEAR LUCY,

        Though I know you will have heard before this of dear L.’s going
  home to her rest, I think you will like to have a few lines from me,
  as I believe E. was not able to write to you herself.

  You heard probably of her breaking a blood vessel last month soon
  after her return to London, and it was very soon after that that I saw
  her for the last time alive. She was very gentle and quiet then, and I
  have since thought that she more entirely realised how near the end
  was than I and others did,—for there was no immediate danger then as
  far as anyone could know. When I told her again how much a duty I
  thought it for her to take the utmost care of her life for His service
  Who gave it, and added ‘Not that I want you or anyone to _fear_
  death,—that is the last thought one should have of the Home-going’,—
  she said,—‘Oh, yes,—I never did, and I never understood why people
  do.’ I told her Mother of this afterwards, and it is a very pleasant
  memory, among others.

  Well, it was on Thursday, November 3rd. that this terrible spasmodic
  asthma came on, and I am afraid the struggle was sore for just the
  week,—but there was mercy in that too, for it made her Mother glad to
  see her at rest after it. Just a week later she died, very
  peacefully,—passing in sleep into the rest that remaineth. I heard of
  it on Thursday and went up to London directly, and I never was more
  heartily glad of having done anything in my life, for both Mrs. B. and
  E. seemed _so_ glad to see me, and you can hardly believe the peaceful
  happy few hours we had together,—indeed there came to me (and I think
  to them too in some degree) such an intense realization of what the
  joy and light was into which she had entered, that no room seemed left
  for any pain even for oneself. I did love L. very much,—more perhaps
  than any of you knew,—but when I stood looking down on that calm pale
  face, the only words that would come into my mind were,—‘He was not,
  for God took him’. It seemed quite impossible even for a moment to
  identify _her_ with that chill silence,—one felt _she_ was already in
  the everlasting arms. Dear child! She left altogether a very happy
  memory,—of a bright clear life, and a calm peaceful death. We ‘thank
  God for this our dear sister departed....’

  The funeral is to be next Wednesday,—I know that you will not be
  absent in spirit, though you cannot be there in presence as I hope to
  be. Mr. Plumptre will read the service at Kensal Green.

  I do not know if I helped dear L. in her life. I know that she has
  helped me in her death almost beyond my conception. I ‘never feared’
  death, and I always felt theoretically how it was the ‘going home’ and
  that only, but I never felt it with the practical intensity of this
  week. I never entered before into half its beauty and its holiness,—I
  feel almost as if I could never associate sadness with the idea again.
  Let it come in what form it may,—‘God giveth us the Victory’.

  Just before she died, L. finished a story at which she had been
  working to compete for some magazine prize,—if it does not win this,
  we hope to get it published separately, as a memorial that will be
  beloved of many,—and indeed I hope it may come out in this form. I
  have offered to undertake the whole business. It is very pleasant to
  me that she has left this,—is it not to you?

  Goodbye, dear Lucy,—my letter is already enormous, but I don’t fear
  your criticisms.

                       Yours affectionately,
                                                   S. L. JEX-BLAKE.”

The monotony of the life that followed was broken by one or two visits
to Paris and one to Germany, and she had a great scheme of going to
America to study the education of girls there. Here again, of course,
she was met by the strong opposition of her Father, and again she was
forced to put forward all the good and attractive points in her plan
while herself profoundly convinced of its vagueness and of her own
physical inadequacy. She saw a good deal at this time of Mrs. Ballantyne
(afterwards Lady Jenkinson) whom she met first in Edinburgh at the house
of her sister, Mrs. Burn Murdoch. This was the beginning of another
lifelong friendship, most refreshing to both,—a friendship characterized
almost equally by playful camaraderie and jesting, and by many long
talks about the things that lie deep.

“She _is_ just good and true and ‘clear’,” S. J.-B. had written in her
diary some months before. She records how they went together to an
evening Holy Communion, what they felt and said,—and goes on without a
break:

  “Then, again she so delicious about my bonnet (_not_ calculated

                    ‘To take upon it
                    The guilt of her wandering soul’.)

  The first time. I saw you in it, nearly disliked you for it—only it
  was past that.

  Not your taste?—Then you oughtn’t to wear what isn’t,—nor to get 14s.
  9d. bonnets!

  Poke into omnibuses?—Poke away, but wear proper bonnets.

  Tottenham Court Road?—No business to go there for bonnets.

  No money?—Then you must manage very badly! [Badly!—poor generous
  child,—counting every halfpenny that she might have the more to give
  away!]

  Your sister?—No, I have nothing to do with her, but I _have_ with you.
  Buy proper bonnets,—then get them altered—

  Whereon I vowed that if she didn’t come to London and choose one, I’d
  buy the ugliest in Tottenham Court Road.

  My compliments to Mrs. Heath, and she oughtn’t to compromise her taste
  by letting you buy such bonnets, etc., etc.

  So very very refreshingly, and with such bright arch eyes.”

It was certainly no lack of appreciation in the ordinary relationships
of life that urged S. J.-B. to find her vocation. There are many
indications of her popularity at this time among cousins and friends.

  “DEAREST SOPHY,” writes the mistress of Honing Hall,—“It will be
  _delightful_ to see you here. How often have I said to myself lately
  (having no one else to address my remarks to,—your Uncle being
  entirely taken up with his harvest, and more bothered than ever by
  it). ‘I do wish Sophy would offer her company for a few days.’

  So, well pleased was I to see your handwriting this morning. I can
  meet you anywhere within reasonable distance. On Thursdays I have only
  your old friend, Little Grey, and on Tuesday, 30th., some of the
  Catfield people are coming over. Should you be here then, it would be
  an additional pleasure to _all_.”

And here is a characteristic note:

  “DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        ... Pray bring back from America a few more such good stories as
  you told me yesterday. I say this _not_ ‘hoping I should see your face
  no more’.

                                 Yours very truly,
                                                  FRANCES P. COBBE.”

On November 11th S. J.-B. received a letter that pleased her much from
the Revd. T. D. C. Morse, rector of Stretford, Manchester:

  “MADAM,

        I have had some correspondence with Professor Plumptre of
  Queen’s College about establishing a Ladies’ College in this locality,
  and he has referred me to you as likely to help me in this good work.
  Notwithstanding the fact that the movement for the improvement of
  female education has now been for some time set on foot, this populous
  neighbourhood is still very destitute in this respect. I have two
  girls, 12 and 13 years of age, and after making enquiries in very
  competent quarters, I have been told that there is only one Ladies’
  School ‘worth a farthing’ in or near Manchester, and that is the
  Ladies’ College on the north side of the city at Higher Broughton. We
  are living on the south side and are surrounded by a large number of
  wealthy people who must necessarily miss such educational facilities.
  I wish therefore to _try_ whether a good Ladies’ College can be
  founded on this side of Manchester, and I would be glad to know
  whether you could introduce me to a lady qualified to act as Principal
  of such an Institution. Mr. Plumptre was not quite sure whether you
  might be disposed to undertake such a work yourself or not, but, if
  you were so, I feel sure from what he has told me that the matter
  could not be in better hands.... You will understand, of course, that
  the matter at present is only in the phase of a project.”

“Plum, I owe thee one!” is S. J.-B.’s irreverent comment,—“good old
Plum!”

“Such a real ‘call’ it sounds—and what a field to learn in!... Now
America seems put in the background with a vengeance.”

She plunged at once into plans and arrangements, timetables, lists of
tutors, etc., and on November 17th she writes in her diary:

  “On Tuesday and today received letters from Mr. Morse, telling me of
  the Bishop’s support, and thus answering my question ... asking me for
  ‘any suggestions’. I feel little more is to be done without an
  interview, but write somewhat on essential heads ‘with great
  diffidence’:

  I am sure that no one can give their really best work to any scheme
  which does not stand on foundation principles with which they are in
  sympathy, and, bearing in mind the proposition you hinted at in your
  first letter, I am bound both for your sake and for my own to
  ascertain as far as possible how far the harmony of our views would
  allow me to be a really efficient worker in your cause. I have a great
  belief in the superiority of rule by Law over that of individual will,
  and should as Director of any such College be very anxious to have as
  little as possible left to my own choice and judgment; but, having
  once been able to acquiesce in the spirit of established regulations,
  would deem it essential to have absolute authority to see them carried
  out alike by teachers and pupils. I am sure that to have such
  questions ill-defined at first is one of the most fruitful sources of
  after disturbance and failure in a college....

  I believe that really good women teachers are more able to measure the
  power of a girl’s mind, and force her to do a certain amount of good
  work than men, who are in my experience very apt to let _young_ pupils
  slip between their fingers, as it were.

  At the same time, after a thorough groundwork has been laid, I think
  first-rate lecturers (almost useless till then) become quite
  invaluable.

  Meaning—I want an interview.

  “Dec. 1st. 1864. Reached Manchester yesterday. Staying now with the
  Morses.

  Capital man he,—clear, energetic and practical; a little ‘trammelled’
  by clerical bonds, but in the main wide and satisfactory.

  Spite of the double assurance of Minnie and Ruth that I need not talk
  of my Unitarianism,—I could not be quite silent, and so tonight,
  naturally enough, and I think truthfully, gave in my half-declaration.

  Mr. Morse said (in answer to my question whether we might not be
  ‘_too_ episcopal’) that, without wishing to exclude any, he wished to
  have the College decidedly of Church origin, and should be sorry to
  have other than Church main workers.

  I said, ‘Then perhaps you had better not have me.’

  ‘But do you not belong to the Church?’

  ‘Well, I was baptized and confirmed in it.’

  ‘But you go there rather than Chapel?’

  ‘Well, I don’t know. I go there pretty often. I go where helps me
  most.’

  ‘Where else?’

  ‘Oh, mainly Unitarian’, adding ‘I have not, however, any intention of
  joining the Unitarians, but they have helped me’, and, in answer to a
  farther remark ‘that I ought to make up my mind clearly black or
  white’.

  ‘That I _can’t_ do.... However on the whole, though very unorthodox, I
  believe I am on the whole most of a Churchwoman, and certainly non-
  proselytizing, nor, I believe in the least likely to originate any
  religious difficulty.’

  Still he was evidently ‘stumped’, and I daresay I shall hear more of
  it.

  Yet, on the whole, feeling as I do, I cannot regret speaking.

                  ‘Be true to every honest thought
                    And as thy thought thy speech.’[35]

Footnote 35:

  Mr. Morse had unwittingly given her some encouragement previously by
  telling the story of a candidate for Orders, who when asked “If any
  man broached before you doubts of the divinity of our Lord (‘and I
  needn’t tell you,’ said Mr. Morse to S. J.-B., ‘what a difficult
  subject that is’) what answer would you make?”

  “My Lord, I beg that you won’t suppose that I keep such company.”

  “Well, but _if_——?”

  “My Lord, I should take up my hat and walk out.”

  “(Prudent too),” comments S. J.-B.

She visited the Principal of Owens’ College, however, and the Headmaster
of the Grammar School, drew up a tentative list of names for Council,
and had a long talk with Mrs. Gaskell, who promised to be a “Lady
Visitor” if the College was founded. (“I explaining it to mean ‘right to
visit’.”)

  “As to my contumacy (it’s really that and not the heresy!), W. and G.
  to be consulted. I said how I wished him to do only what he thought
  right,—yet believing they would be wise to have me(!)

  I think he surely _wishes_ it, and, as I should guess he would find
  his consultees not otherwise inclined, a very small push would decide
  him that way.

  (Stories,—‘The fool hath said in his heart,’ etc. Old sexton loq. ‘I
  can’t but think, sir, there is a God after all’).”

  “Dec. 4th. Came to Rugby last night. The music in chapel again and
  again bringing me well-nigh to tears,—so weak and thin is one worn.

  (Yet should surely notice the good Miss Garrett’s medicine does me—
  taken about a fortnight now.)...

  And how the conviction came (when first this Manchester scheme) ‘Yes,—
  “be thou but fit for the wall, and thou shalt not be left in the way.”
  It _is_ true!...

  Is Minnie far wrong in her ‘Men have the best of it’? Easiest,—yes!—

  Fancy the pleasure of going through School,—College,—returning
  hallmarked, for good happy well-paid work here.

  Yet is the easiest ‘Best’?

  Must there not be pioneers?—can their work be easy?

  Yet is there not (in many tongues and roads) a ‘noble army of
  martyrs’?

  Shall we like Erasmus ‘not aspire to that honour’?

  But, oh, dear, when the heart’s light and brain clear and life sunny,
  it’s easy to ‘scorn delights’ (having plenty of the reallest) but when
  the ‘laborious days’ fail and only weary and dim ones remain—when the
  tunnel narrows and darkens, and nearly all the light and strength
  seems to have leaked out—

  Then—?

  ‘My Grace is sufficient for thee’. No other help,—‘none other fighteth
  for us’—and what need?—‘Only _Thou_, O God.’”

How little her friends could guess the attitude of her mind may be
gathered from the entry that follows:

  “Dec. 5th. M.’s and my mutual objection to family prayers evidenced by
  staying out tonight. Justified?

  I say, prayer continual and interjectional rather than formal and
  obligatory.

  But follow out logically? Public worship, etc.”

Meanwhile she was hard at work, drawing up schemes for the proposed
College, visiting schools and colleges for men, and striving to fit
herself for the new work. Mr. Morse must have felt that Mr. Plumptre had
recommended a worker of remarkable talents, fine sincerity and most
unusual enthusiasm, one whose knowledge of life and of the world was far
in advance of what might have been expected from her years. Such
qualities have to be paid for, of course. Nature has a rather staggering
way of throwing in counterbalancing asperities, and, when S. J.-B.
proposed to foster a religious spirit in the college without the
formality of daily prayers, he must have begun to realize the
inflexibility of the person he was dealing with. He would probably have
sympathized with the dictum of Cousin Ellie,—“I would do anything for
you if I could only make even a slight alteration”!

All we actually know is that he showed no indication of wishing to draw
back; and at least one public meeting in support of the scheme was duly
held and reported at length in the local papers. Public opinion,
however, on the subject, needed more fundamental education than Mr.
Morse had allowed for, and—although S. J.-B.’s budget was characterized
by the splendid economy that was one of her most striking talents—the
project failed for want of adequate financial support.

  “Feb. 22nd. Manchester scheme obiit. R.I.P.! I must be really in a bad
  way to be able to find so few mental tears for this! It does
  practically close up my foreground again. Heu mihi! Why mayn’t useless
  people be smothered out of the way if there’s no possibility of being
  or doing or having?

  ‘Because you’ve got to _learn_’, as that good Miss Harry said last
  night.”

In the midst of these varied personal interests, S. J.-B. did not lose
touch with her old girls at Queen’s College. Indeed, when one realizes
the intensity of her own experiences, it is rather refreshing to see how
whole-heartedly she could enter into those of others.

                                                   “Feb. 23rd. 1864.
                                                       Brighton.

  MY DEAR LUCY,

        I feel rather guilty in not having written to you before this,
  but I do not think that you will attribute the omission to any want of
  interest in one of my dear old ‘children’.... I have to send you my
  hearty congratulations and good wishes for the life that seems opening
  so happily before you. Happiness is a wonderfully solemn thing,—a
  thing to go down on one’s knees and thank God for....

                 ‘So pray they, bowed with sorrow down,—
                 While we whom love and gladness crown
                 Bend lower yet in prayer;
                 With hearts so full we need to pray,
                 “Oh, make us worthy, Lord, alway,
                 This weight of love to bear....”’

  Don’t be too self-distrustful, dear child,—I don’t believe that you
  are at all ‘unfit to be a help to anyone’.... Send me as long a letter
  as your indolence will admit of, and tell me all about your prospects,
  and whether your engagement is likely to be a short or long one.”

                                                   “Dec. 13th. 1864.

  ... Having heard from E. B. of your marriage last month, I was not
  quite so bewildered as I might have been at receiving an epistle from
  a certain mysterious ‘Lucy Unwin’—

  ... I am so glad to hear of your being so happy, dear child (dear me,
  I suppose I ought to be more respectful to so venerable a matron!) I
  daresay if I heard the other side of the question it would not be so
  full of wailings over your incompetencies general and particular as
  yours is.... I should like exceedingly to see you in your new sphere
  ... and please thank your husband very much for taking me so much on
  trust as to want to see me,—though perhaps, after all, the real
  compliment is to _you_! It will be a great pleasure for me to come to
  you for a few days when I am next in the North.”

                                          [Received May 10th, 1865.]

  I had hoped to pay you a visit before this, and I am afraid you will
  be disappointed as well as myself when I tell you it must now, I fear,
  be indefinitely deferred, for circumstances have made me decide rather
  hurriedly to pay a long-planned visit to America for the purpose of
  learning something about the schools and colleges there.

  I am to start from Liverpool on Saturday the 27th., and am going to
  take with me a girl whom you will perhaps hardly remember at Qu:
  College:—indeed I think she was after your time,—Isabel Bain.

                                                   “May 14th., 1865.

  DEAR LUCY,

        I should like exceedingly to see you if it were possible before
  sailing for America, and your letter has made me wish more than ever
  to do so.

  If I found it just possible to come to you for one day and night,
  would you think it worth while to have me? I do not know what the
  possibilities are,—are you _in_ the town?—or would it be an
  undertaking to get to you from the station? Would it upset you all
  terribly if I came and went at unearthly hours as I might have to do?

  I should like to see you exceedingly, and I should like _very_ much to
  see your husband,—if my coming in such a rush and making such a fuss
  wouldn’t make him hate me.

  Thank you very much for your photograph. There are no decent ones of
  me, but I will see if I can find you up one of the least bad.”

The visit was paid in due course, and proved successful in every way.
Mr. Unwin frankly shared his wife’s admiration for the character and
gifts of her old college friend, and this was by no means the last visit
she paid to their Yorkshire home.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the meantime S. J.-B. had carried out another idea that had been
simmering in her mind for long. It may be remembered how in her
childhood she had “bought tracts (for 6d) with Carry,” and had even,
apparently, been encouraged by her Father to give them away. The
distribution of evangelical tracts was a great feature of the religious
world in which she had been brought up, and, with the hopefulness of
youth, she felt how much good might be done by circulating helpful
religious pamphlets of a non-doctrinal kind. As a first step towards the
realization of this scheme, she herself wrote three tracts,[36] and had
them printed at her own expense. The most remarkable thing about them—in
view of the writer’s youth—is their non-controversial spirit. A Father
of the Church could not have written more simply. With proper machinery
for distribution they might have met with some considerable success: as
it was the poor little booklets crept timidly into the world only to be
pronounced sadly wanting in essentials by most of those who read them.

Footnote 36:

  Appendix B.

“Very harmless, but very useless,” said Mrs. Jex-Blake, and she at least
knew enough of tracts to be an authority on the subject. She had evaded
reading these as long as possible, and, of course it was not to the
dearly-loved writer of them that she made the crushing comment.

The _Guardian_, strangely enough, reviewed them rather favourably, and a
few total strangers wrote to say that this was the thing for which they
had long been looking; but on the whole appreciation was rare.

“Frankly, I call them Cobbe and water,” said Mr. Morse.

For the Kingdom of Heaven is a treasure hid in a field, and S. J.-B.
never realized how few can avail themselves of the treasure without
first buying the field.




                              CHAPTER XIII
             A VISIT TO SOME AMERICAN SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES


“I have such a feeling that with the new world, a new life will open.”

So S. J.-B. had written in October 1864, and, seven months later, she
sailed for Boston. This crossing of the Atlantic was another
considerable venture for the young woman of those days; and, although S.
J.-B. took with her a number of introductions, she knew no one on the
other side. She was fortunate, however, in her travelling companion,
Miss Isabel Bain (now Mrs. James Brander, H.M. Inspectress of Schools
for Madras, retired), a young girl of exceptional charm and promise, in
whose education S. J.-B. and her parents had taken a deep and active
interest.

It is scarcely necessary to say that both Mr. and Mrs. Jex-Blake
regarded the new enterprise with profound misgiving: a few days before
the parting Mrs. Jex-Blake had written to Mrs. Ballantyne:

  “I was so sadly selfish and engrossed about America the few hours you
  were here, that I must write a line to tell you how grateful I feel
  for all your kindness to Sophy, and how thankful I am that she has
  such a friend to consult with in this hour of need. I hope you did not
  suffer for the way in which you were plagued here: it really was very
  hard: though I quite believe you don’t think so.

  Tuesday. Sophy’s letter has just come, and I do indeed need your
  prayers and sympathy. The wrench it is to me to have her go is
  indescribable, but I hope and believe my view will be more reasonable
  as time goes on. Any way, I know I shall have strength to bear. It is
  quite a panic, and I feel as if I must run away from it. Yet I would
  not prevent it if I could. I should have been very thankful for an
  older companion....

  I ought not to plague you, her good kind friend.

  May God bless you and _all_ dear to you.

                                    Yours affectionately,
                                                         M. E. J.-B.

  I hope to write you a less selfish letter another time. I am hardly
  myself now. Is it not curious,—I have such a prejudice against
  Americans that I hardly ever will read a book describing American
  manners. I _hate_ descriptions of low life.”

Surely the frequent twinkle was returning to her eye when she wrote the
closing words of the postscript? In any case there is no doubt about it
a short time later when a question arose about Miss Bain’s leaving S.
J.-B. and becoming a student in one of the colleges they had visited
together:

  “I think Daddy has a terror of only your bleached bones(!) being
  found, if you went about without a companion.”

The two girls left Liverpool on May 27th, and, after experiencing some
rough weather which confined them to their berths, they staggered
gallantly up on deck to enjoy the voyage and to make the acquaintance of
their fellow-passengers. “A very nice Scotch Independent, Dr. Raleigh of
Canonbury,” is specially noted.

The great excitement of the voyage is described in a letter to her
Mother:

  “After I had done writing to you, we were summoned by a cry of
  ‘Icebergs!’ and up we ran to see a bright white light on the horizon,
  just visible, right on our track. Soon another came in sight and it
  was really grand the next hour. The evening hardly beginning to close
  in, but the cold _intense_, yet so beautiful.... On went the ship,
  tearing on to the icebergs, that grew whiter and larger every minute,—
  great cliffs of white rearing themselves out of the waves that beat
  into spray at their base,—looking so strong and grim and beautiful.”

On June 8th the _Africa_ reached Boston about midnight, and next morning
the two young women went on shore to begin the new life. The weather was
very warm and most of the people to whom they had introductions were out
of town. The travellers suffered a good deal from the heat and from
various minor inconveniences due mainly to the strangeness and
expensiveness of life in general; but S. J.-B. does not fail to put on
record how much they enjoyed the ice-cream!

Dr. Lucy Sewall was at her post, but Mrs. Peter Taylor, in providing
this introduction had given the wrong address, and it was a couple of
days before they succeeded in finding her. The meeting was destined to
be full of significance in determining S. J.-B.’s future career.

It was an interesting moment in which to visit the States. The war was
over, but feeling still ran high, and, although the travellers met with
much kindness and hospitality, they were not a little surprised to find
themselves in an atmosphere of deep resentment against England.

  “Oh, dear, How they turned on the tap, and talked right on end when
  they got near politics, only pausing to wonder at our ‘ignorance’ in
  England (that being, of course, the only source of difference of
  opinion with them). Finally, after listening with the utmost patience
  indefinitely—only devoutly wishing to kick over the table—I got
  mentally [sic] collared by Miss Peabody with an accusation of being
  ‘still incredulous’, to which I replied very frankly, that ‘certainly
  till I heard both sides I could form no definite opinion.’

  Emerson was refreshing after the rest, inasmuch as, after speaking, he
  would allow you to answer.... A Miss Elizabeth Hoar told me she had
  seen Carlyle in London in 1862, and that he had said to her,—‘So
  you’re quarrelling out there? Why don’t you let the Southerners go to
  the devil with their niggers if they like, and you go to Heaven with
  your virtues if you can?’ Rather sensible, I thought,—from one point
  of view at any rate.”

There is a pleasant little letter from Emerson, written after this
meeting:

  “Concord. Monday 14th June. [1865.]

  DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        I am sorry to be so very slow in sending you the address of Mr.
  Fields’ good farmer in the White Mountains region. It is Selden C.
  Willey, Compton Village, 6 miles from Plymouth, New Hampshire. I
  looked for it immediately on my return from Mrs. Mann’s, but could not
  find it, and now today have stumbled on it in looking for something
  else. Tis probable that you may have seen Mr. Fields himself before
  this time. When I have found my right correspondent at Oberlin, I
  shall hope to bring you my letter in person.

                                 With great regard,
                                                      R. W. EMERSON.

  Miss Blake.”

The diary continues:

  “Everyone most wonderfully kind and helpful to us personally—lots of
  offers of introductions, etc. That nice Dr. Sewall very anxious that I
  should not tire myself out and ‘get sick’. By the bye one really can
  converse with her, I think.”

There is a kind little note from Dr. Sewall also:

  “MY DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        As usual this evening I enjoyed your society so much that I
  forgot to say half that I wanted to....

  If you call on Mr. Emerson today, I think you had better call in the
  afternoon, as he told me he was engaged Wednesday and Saturday
  forenoons.

  Don’t have any neuralgia when you come to the Hospital today, or I may
  want to try my Electromagnetic machine on your face. I have not seen
  Dr. Zakrzewska yet, but I want you to come early.

                                   Yours sincerely,
                                                    LUCY C. SEWALL.”

Dr. Lucy Sewall was at this time a young woman of 28, a worthy
descendant of “a long line of truly noble ancestry.”[37] She held the
appointment of Resident Physician to the New England Hospital for Women
and Children (an institution which had been founded in great measure
through the exertions of her father, the Hon. Samuel Sewall), but there
was nothing about her to suggest that she had adopted what was at that
time an unusual line of life for a woman. Singularly girlish in
appearance, she was and remained throughout life so gentle and womanly
that, until one knew her well, her reserves of strength were a source of
repeated surprise. “So simple and humble and kindly,” writes S. J.-B. at
this time,—“said she ‘_could_ not succeed in learning to think enough
before she spoke about a case.’”

Footnote 37:

  See _inter alia_ Whittier’s poem, “The Prophecy of Samuel Sewall,
  1697.”

No wonder S. J.-B. was attracted. A warm friendship sprang up between
the two young women, a friendship by means of which S. J.-B. was
introduced primarily to the world of Medicine, and, secondarily, to the
wide question of Feminism. She had been living, of course, in a feminist
world at home, and a very choice world of its kind; but here the
movement had become more explicit, its aims were clearly defined and
partially realized. It had, no doubt, lost a certain amount of charm in
the process, but that is the fate of all movements the world over. They
too have to be worked out “in the commonplace clay with which the world
provides us.”

In any case S. J.-B. was profoundly influenced by the change of
atmosphere. Her conception of woman’s work and woman’s sphere began to
widen out. On June 22nd she writes to her Mother:

  “We saw Miss Crocker the other day,—late Mathematical professor at
  Antioch,—and she impressed me extremely with her quiet dignity and
  wisdom, and her tremendous Mathematics,—I _should_ so like to study
  under her some day. I felt like an uppish dwarf beside some strong
  quiet giant.”

And a few days later:

  “By the way that wonderful astronomer, Maria Mitchell, whom I told you
  we were going to see, is a _very_ nice woman—grand and able and strong
  and kindly.... She is to be a professor at Poughkeepsie, and, if we go
  there, I shall certainly hope to learn of her,—though I did not know
  that Astronomy would ever have come into my life. Any way it will be a
  great pleasure to know such a woman.”

On the same day she records in her diary:

  “Sat for a couple of hours in Dr. Sewall’s dispensary this morning.
  Some 36 cases heard and helped more or less. Some coming with bright
  faces,—‘So much better, Doctor,’—some in pain enough, poor souls. Dr.
  Sewall with such a kindly ready sympathy, and such clear firm
  treatment for them all. Certainly the right woman in the right place,
  except in as far as she herself gets to look sadly fagged and tired
  sometimes.”

The state of S. J.-B.’s own health continued very unsatisfactory. “What
is one to do,” she says, “when one has alternate days of ‘feeling like a
tallow candle,’ and days of feeling rather grand and energetic, like
yesterday, when my ‘book’ was begun with a bounce?” After watching her
for some weeks, Dr. Sewall pronounced her “worn out in mind and body,”
and advised a holiday among the hills until the excessive heat was over.
So she paid a delightful visit to Professor and Mrs. Rogers at
Lunenburg, and then went on to West Compton near the White Mountains.
“The railway (a single line) cut through delicious woods with no fence
or wall, just through the wildest glades full of ferns and pyrolas,—
vistas of sun on fir and maple boles,—then again by the side of one
lovely lake after another, a perfect prodigality of beauty.”

                                                    “Aug. 18th 1865.
                                                      West Compton.

  DARLING MOTHER,—I don’t think I shall be able to write by the next
  mail, as we are going for a few days’ excursion round the mountains,
  so I must send you off now as long a letter as I can manage, telling
  you what we have been doing just lately.

  First and foremost, I have been coming in useful as ‘teamster’, in
  Yankee parlance, having been chiefly employed in driving my neighbours
  all about the country lately. You would have laughed, I think, had you
  seen my ‘span’ (pair of horses) the other day,—one brown, pretty
  high,—the other mouse coloured and some three inches lower, the most
  delightful variety prevailing in the harnessing and general appearance
  of the two. Behind these beauties came six of us in a big rough
  country ‘wagon’, all of painted wood,—two big seats fixed in a sort of
  open cart.

  We went through _such_ a ford,—the Penningewassett River, and (when
  the horses didn’t bite each other) we got on grandly....”

  “You haven’t the least idea what that word ‘woods’ means,—in England
  there are just a few acres of carefully preserved trees and ‘no
  trespassers allowed’. Here you plunge into a vast forest, miles and
  miles every way,—lucky if you can find a path at all, else guiding
  yourself by sun and stream and taking hours and hours to get a mile or
  two,—yet all through so grand, so green, and so delicious! If you
  could just have been with us yesterday! Every few minutes we found
  some great tree fallen across our path, or some black bog of decayed
  cedar or pine,—oh, the scents of those!—perfectly delicious;—and then
  round we had to go, creeping, jumping or gliding round the
  obstruction. Then we would come to some little clearing, and catch
  such views of the mountains we were shut in with,—then on again and
  hardly see daylight through the dense trees. And such mosses, such
  ferns, such berries!

  Then over the river somehow from rock to rock, and such a scramble up
  among the cascades which came leaping down like liquid silver in the
  sunlight, and such pools we did so want to bathe in, and had to
  [refrain] for lack of time and towels! They called the distance 2½ or
  3 miles, but we took just 3 hours to get there,—and then coming back
  pretty sharply in about half the time. The only grief to me was—what
  perhaps you will hardly sympathize in—that we didn’t come across any
  bear. There are a good many left in the woods and one hears every now
  and then of their being met, but they are getting few, and they are
  proportionately timid and modest, running off full speed if they see
  you. Wouldn’t it have been fun to see one?...

  I think hardly anything strikes an Englisher more than the no-value of
  wood here. Over the water it’s half high treason to hurt a tree;—here,
  if you want a napkin-ring, you strip the bark off the first birch you
  come to and make a lot; or, if you take it into your head, set fire to
  the woods anywhere and have a bonfire of a dozen trees, and no one
  says a word. We have seen woods on fire over and over again, and no
  one says more than,—‘Oh, somebody’s fired the wood’; and the odd thing
  is it doesn’t seem to spread as one would expect.

  One comes continually to clearings full of blackened stumps not yet
  grubbed up,—the beginning of a garden or house place perhaps. I want
  to see a great big forest fire some day,—and I only wish I might see a
  prairie on fire too; only that is said to be horribly dangerous. It is
  so funny to hear here, as when I was asking about a certain road (from
  St. Louis to California), ‘Yes, it’s the shortest, but the Indians are
  cross just now and have been scalping a lot of people there’!

  Well, darling, we had such a drive home by starlight last night, and
  all enjoyed our day hugely. When we got in I suppose I walked slightly
  lame or something, for my greeting was,—‘I guess you’re tired, an’t
  you? You’re kind o’ waggling’!”

One is quite sorry to see the Boston postmark again; but the high
spirits do not flag. “You don’t know,” she writes to her Mother, “what
an immense thing it is for us to have got free admission to the Woman’s
Hospital life here,—we are always doing something jolly together with
the students and doctors,—all women, by the way.

  Dr. Sewall is resident Physician, and is always asking us to spend
  jolly evenings there,—or to join them in going to theatres, etc.
  Yesterday we made an expedition in the evening to a famous place for
  ice-cream, 8 of us there were—4 M.D.s (one of whom is a splendid
  surgeon,—the first female surgeon I have heard of) two students and we
  two. After the ices we went back to the Hospital, and played a most
  ridiculous game of cards called ‘Muggins’, keeping us in roars of
  laughter half the time. Then Dr. Tyng (the surgeon) sang, and, among
  other things gave us a specimen of the ‘Shaker’ singing—with its very
  peculiar religious dance,—have you heard about the Shakers? I hope to
  see them and then I will tell you.

  But can’t you understand how refreshing it is to slip into the bright
  life of all these working people—working hard all day, and then so
  ready for fun when work’s over? It reminds me of the full colour and
  life of the old London times when all we working women were together.”

So she utilised every opportunity of getting information likely to help
in her study of the conditions of Women’s education. She regretted in
after life that her dislike of ‘lion-hunting’ had prevented her from
making—or cultivating—the acquaintance of well-known people who did not
seem likely to be of direct help in her work. Not that she disdained the
opportunities when they actually came within reach. Here is an
interesting episode in the course of her wanderings:

  “Sept. 9th. Went over to Concord, Mass. by 11 a.m. train. At the
  station found Waldo Emerson just fetching his wife and friends. I
  spoke to him and he very cordially asked us to ‘take our dinner’ with
  him. We accepted, first paying a visit to Mrs. Horace Mann and Miss
  Peabody. Mrs. Mann gave me a letter to Mr. Pennel (her nephew) at St.
  Louis, whither I am advised to go after Oberlin and Antioch perhaps.
  Poughkeepsie we must visit later, by wish of the President, Dr.
  Raymond.

  Went on to Emerson’s to dinner. Was received by one of the daughters,
  Ellen,—simple and kindly, the ‘housekeeper’, I should think—and shown
  into a room with several people.... About 3 p.m. dinner served, more
  English-wise than most, though with a new Irish maid for waiter, who
  looked anxiously to ‘Ellen’ for orders. Another daughter, Edith (about
  to be married) and a son, Edward. They had sherry on the table, which
  I have only seen at the Rogers’ besides,... Pears and grapes,—partly
  the queer sage grapes with tarry flavour,—on a pretty basket, large
  and shallow.

  Mr. Emerson struck me as having one of the sweetest expressions I have
  ever seen on a man’s mouth. He was very kind in offering help. We
  talked besides a little about Swedenborg, for whom he seemed to have
  some admiration. ‘To be read as one reads a poet’s ideas,—not
  critically,’ he said, and spoke of the pre-inspiration works on
  science, etc., as really valuable.

  Mrs. Emerson talked a little about ‘women’s questions’, female
  franchise, etc.—and spoke of the wonderful blinding power of habit,—as
  in slavery question,—looking to Christianity in its advance to set all
  to rights.

  I remarked that few had done more harm to the cause than St. Paul by
  some of his words. She replied very truly that the fault lay rather in
  those who would rigidly apply such words and consider them binding out
  of all connection of time and place.”

It was left to a later friend to point out that St. Paul showed himself
in this respect the John Stuart Mill of his day when he asserted that
‘in Jesus Christ is neither male nor female.’

  “Speaking a little to an old schoolfellow of Emerson’s he told me it
  was hard for anyone to say what Emerson’s opinions were. I said I had
  heard of him as a pantheist; he said at any rate he was one of the
  best of men and had been from boyhood up.”

A few days later she visited Niagara,—“the only ‘pleasure’ thing” she
tells her Mother, “I _resolved_ to do if possible. We hope to spend next
Sunday there,—not a bad church, will it be?” From Niagara she writes to
Mrs. Unwin:

                                                  “Sept. 17th. 1865.
                                                      Niagara.

  MY DEAR LUCY,

        I congratulate you with all my heart on the birth of your little
  son! I think by this time you will have forgotten all doubts and
  difficulties, and all but pleasant feelings of responsibility, in your
  great content, have you not? God very seldom sends us either duties or
  blessings without showing us how to fulfil and enjoy and use them, and
  I do not doubt but you will have found in your own case all sorts of
  new powers and instincts develop with the need of them, and will have
  by this time a pretty definite idea ‘What to do with a baby’—Is it not
  so?...

  I wish there existed a visual telegraph (if such a phrase may be
  coined) and that I could give you a glimpse of the scene I have in
  front of me, and which is continually stealing my eyes from my paper.
  No less than Niagara in its full glory!—and what that glory is I don’t
  think any _but_ eyes can tell. I have seen a good deal of beauty and
  grandeur in my life, in Great Britain, Italy, Switzerland, etc., but I
  think never anything so wonderfully, bewitchingly, grandly beautifully
  as this. People talk of being disappointed in Niagara, but I think it
  can only be because, for the first moment, the enormous width of the
  Falls (900 feet in one case, 2000 in the other,—separated by an
  island) prevents their recognizing their height as well, or else they
  have not got the right natures to admire with! (and I think that last
  is oftener the case than people think).

  It gives one most wonderfully the feeling of power and immensity,—the
  sort of feeling that was [expressed] long ago, ‘When I consider the
  work of Thy fingers, what is man that Thou are mindful of him?’—and
  yet the feeling of infinite beauty and harmony too. Before leaving we
  go under the Falls, and into the ‘Cave of the Winds’ behind a vast
  curtain of water, and that I think must give one almost more strongly
  still the impression of might and vastness. It is very little use to
  talk about it any more, I wish you could see it!

  Thank you very much for writing to my Mother about A. I hope she will
  get away from her present uncomfortable place,—it would give me great
  pleasure if she came to you. Only I warn you I shall claim her some
  day!

  Goodbye, dear child. With all good wishes for you and yours, I am ever

                            Yours very sincerely,
                                                   S. L. JEX-BLAKE.”

From Niagara she went via Cleveland to Oberlin, and so began the tour
which she afterwards described in _A Visit to some American Schools and
Colleges_ (published by Macmillan in 1867). She had been very kindly
advised by Dr. Hill, the President of Harvard, as to the Colleges best
worth visiting, and the experience proved both interesting and useful.
At Oberlin the two sexes were almost equally represented, and “coloured”
students formed about a third of the whole number. “In the year of my
visit,” she writes, “it so happened that the only woman who graduated
was a coloured girl, originally a slave, who had not even then paid her
full ransom to her former owners.” A considerable proportion of students
of both sexes supported themselves wholly or in part by doing the
domestic work of the establishment. Manners were rather rough even for
the America of those days, but the standard of behaviour was high, and
the religious atmosphere almost overwhelming.

From Oberlin she went on to Hillsdale, St. Louis, and Antioch (at Yellow
Springs in Ohio) spending a few days or weeks at each; and afterwards
she visited a number of schools. What impressed her perhaps more than
anything else was the success with which the joint education of men and
women was carried on, and this impression was destined to play its part
in the later struggles of her life.

“If anyone asks you again about my views of comparative English and
American teaching,” she writes to her Mother, “I suppose I may say that
I believe on the whole American girls _are_ more thoroughly, and
especially more universally, taught fundamental things. They learn
Mathematics more thoroughly, and Latin more invariably; their knowledge
of modern languages is decidedly inferior (very naturally, being so far
from France, Germany, etc.) and their English and their manners both
less polished. But I should think a decidedly smaller number of them are
able to manage to grow up _quite_ ignorant!” It annoyed her a good deal
that, in the matter of pronunciation, an American will always ask you
“what dictionary you go by,” and seems quite unable to understand the
unwritten law of language which in England reigns supreme, and from
which, if a dictionary differs, it simply condemns itself.

Her birthday inspired a breezy letter from her brother:

                                        “13 Sussex Square, Brighton.
                                               Jan. 21. 1866.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        Many happy returns of your 26th birthday, as they would say in
  Ireland: and may they ache find you younger and fresher!

  We have been enjoying three very fresh but windy weeks here; and are
  now leaving tomorrow for Rugby. We leave Violet, Katharine and Netta
  here, however, as they are only half through measles....

  We have ridden a good deal, been with the hounds more than usual; and
  not read much. Lecky on Rationalism is the best book I have read
  lately, of the fairly solid sort; Swinburne’s Atalanta the best new
  poem; Citoyenne Jacqueline the best new novel; Mr. ——’s the worst
  stale sermons. Is there anything good out in American literature of
  late? Artemus Ward is good in his line, but his line is audacious.

  I should like six months in America immensely; locomotive, with
  introductions, I don’t know the politics of the people you are with or
  have been with; but I was always a Northerner.... I wonder how the
  Mexican business will end: and cannot pretend to guess: but I hope
  Louis Napoleon ... will soon withdraw his troops, and Maximilian will
  collapse. We are on the eve of a noisy session, I expect; Home Office
  stung by reform into a queer tarantula, and Colonial secretaries
  badgered about Jamaica by both sides of the House. I cannot pretend to
  judge till we get more evidence: but as yet none has turned up which
  in my eyes justifies the execution of Gordon—who for all that was
  probably deep.... Have I wearied you out with politics? or have you
  not read so far?

                              With love from us all,
                                     I am your affecte brother,
                                                   T. W. JEX-BLAKE.”

She answered the letter while the stimulus of it was fresh:

  “DEAR TOM,

        Many thanks for your birthday letter. Though they came rather
  late, I got quite a budget at last.

  I quite agree that you ought to come and see America,—both its people
  and its scenery. It’s a queer study in all ways, one finds so much to
  like and respect, and so much that one is inclined to laugh at. People
  are certainly less tied and bound by the chain of ‘on dit’, on this
  side the water, and that tells more for good than for evil, I think;
  but on the other hand it lets people who are so inclined fall into
  overgrown eccentricities, and set at nought to an alarming extent all
  rules of grammar and etiquette when they don’t suit. In fact I have
  not found more than three or four Americans altogether who talk what
  we should consider cultivated English, or behave as if they had been
  in what we call cultivated society. They’ll pick their teeth while
  they talk to you (so will the shopmen—‘store clerks’, if you please,—
  while they serve you) spit within an inch of you, eat things in the
  streets while walking with you, perhaps whistle and sing ditto; talk
  about what they ‘had ought to do’, say they should ‘admire to do so
  and so for you’ or ask if they shall ‘turn out the tea,’ etc. And all
  this from men who have been through College, and women who know more
  Mathematics, Latin, Greek and Philosophy than I dare think about. In
  fact there’s a very curious contrast in the much higher level of
  learning and the much lower level of outward signs of refinement in
  American as compared with English averages.

  I’m afraid that while we may have some few hundreds better educated,—
  more ‘elegant scholars’—than any in America, we must confess that
  there is here a very much higher percentage of fairly well read and
  well educated people than with us. I notice this specially among the
  girls—as to the men I know less. But almost all girls here have
  studied a good deal things few English girls go much into—specially
  Mathematics and natural science.

  Then I am sure no one ought to speak more highly than I of American
  kindness and hospitality,—I am very much afraid few foreigners would
  have found in England such a welcome as I met with here. People were
  so cordially kind in helping me in all sorts of ways.... There seems
  to me much less of the spirit of ‘pride of office,’ etc., much more
  readiness to admit one everywhere to see everything, and to be ready
  to help without standing too much on one’s dignity. I found this
  specially in the case of Dr. Hill, President of Harvard University,
  the first in America—and the same in the case of the presidents of the
  colleges for both sexes, Oberlin, Hillsdale, and Antioch.

  I don’t know whether you will care for all these results of my
  observations, but your mention of America and wish to see it drew them
  out.

  As to politics, I knew very little about them before I came, and had a
  faint sort of prejudice in favour of the South, believing the North to
  be very insincere about slavery, etc. I now think that the Anti-
  slavery cry _has_ been used most shamelessly for private and political
  ends by some, but that there is at the heart of Yankeedom a strong
  true heart beating earnestly in favour of liberty for negroes as well
  as whites, and that there are and have been very many most sincerely
  bent on very unselfish ends, and a great deal of real patriotism (on
  both sides probably) evolved by the war.

  I am chiefly with some of the very best of the Anti-slavery people.
  The Sewalls used to shelter escaped negroes when to do so was a penal
  offence.

  I saw Lecky’s Rationalism (which ought rather to be called the History
  of Reasonableness) before I left England, but only read part of it. I
  first found it on Miss Cobbe’s table, and liked it very much. I don’t
  know of any great American books lately,—they pirate almost everything
  English.

  I think the English here must be feeling pretty badly about Jamaican
  affairs,—I am. They say the French troops are certainly to evacuate
  Mexico now....

  I hope Hetty got thanked for her note a little while ago,—this letter
  is meant as much for her as for you, though I forgot to begin it so.
  Love to the bairns. I suppose I shall scarcely know them when I get
  back.

                                     Your aff. sister,
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”




                              CHAPTER XIV
                              QUESTIONINGS


When S. J.-B. left England her plan had been to spend at least part of
the winter with an old school-friend, now married to the Revd. Addington
Venables—afterwards Bishop—of Nassau in the West Indies; but life in
Boston proved too attractive. She liked the women doctors and they liked
her; possibly they had designs on her; in any case Dr. Sewall was
anxious to get her health up to such a level as would make professional
life a possibility; and, for the furtherance of this end, it was
arranged that she should share the resident’s little house in connection
with the hospital. Miss Isabel Bain had gone to pursue her education in
one of the good girls’ schools. Already in October one had heard of S.
J.-B. “helping the doctor through oceans of figures in hospital
reports,” and one can well believe that she was an efficient member of
the little community. The very day after she took up her residence in
the hospital precincts the “student” who did the dispensing was summoned
away, and as—of course!—there was a run of arduous cases at the same
time, S. J.-B. cheerfully volunteered to do the dispensing,—“and was
very thankfully accepted” to fill the gap! Within a week she writes to
her Mother:

  “It’s very amusing, dear, to learn to write and make up prescriptions
  so easily,—I shall be up to the doctors in future you see! I have just
  been making one up for myself under the doctor’s directions, to my
  great amusement,— ... and precious nasty it is!

  It’s a great comfort to be of some sort of use to these people who are
  so frightfully overworked just now.... Besides being apothecary, I’m
  general secretary,—write all the business letters (which the doctor
  hates) and post up the hospital records of cases, etc.; and besides
  this I requested to be and got appointed what I call ‘chaplain’ with
  discretionary powers. The only people who visit in the hospital
  (besides friends at visiting hours) are the Lady Managers, each of
  whom has a month on duty, and besides that Mr. Barnard comes and holds
  a short service and preaches every Sunday afternoon. So I thought that
  the patients would like some reading, etc., sometimes, and Dr. Sewall
  gave me leave to do all I liked.... You can’t think how pleased they
  were all of them, and how heartily they asked me to come again, which
  I shall do pretty often.”

A week later (Nov. 24th) she writes again:

  “At present I am so exceedingly content in my quaint pleasant quarters
  in the midst of so new a working world, that I hardly feel the need of
  anything beyond; and I do greatly want quiet and rest to ‘recuperate’
  as the new word goes. I can’t tell you when I have found so much
  chance of rest of mind and quiet interest in things wholly unconnected
  with the old pain,—not for years, I am sure, and I have ready to hand
  just as much work as I feel able for, and yet no strain on me to do it
  if I am not able. I can’t tell you the pleasure it gives one simply to
  see Dr. Sewall in her hospital and especially among her poor patients.
  She is such a true _Healer_;—so infinitely compassionate and
  sympathetic, with blue eyes sometimes quite full of sorrow for the
  people’s pain, yet such strong firm hand and will to remedy even
  _through_ pain. I say a dozen times a day,—‘Were I not a teacher, I
  would be a doctor’—if I could.

  (Nov. 27th.) This hospital life is simply charming. So busy, so
  simple, so quaint and so interesting! I am entering more and more
  fully into it daily, and finding more and more nooks which I can fill
  ... sometimes giving mechanical aid in operations where they want an
  extra hand, etc.

  Darling, one very unexpected result is coming out of this new life
  which I embraced simply for its rest and comfort,—I find myself
  getting desperately in love with medicine as a science and as an art,
  to an extent I could not have believed possible. I always associated
  so much that is repulsive and nasty with it in my mind, but I find
  that one really loses all sense of that in close contact,—that the
  beauty of nature’s arrangements and of art’s contrivances absorb one’s
  mind from everything less pleasant, and I find myself saying to myself
  a dozen times a day that, did I not feel my life devoted to another
  object, I would be a doctor straightway. As it is, I mean to use all
  the time I have in gaining all I can, by observation (for which one so
  rarely has such a chance) even more than by study, though I find
  myself devouring all sorts of medical works too, and am quite amazed
  to find how far even in this little time I am able to understand to a
  certain extent all sorts of things going on around me, and how _very_
  interesting they all become in the new light.... Of course one has
  access to an enormous medical library here, and the junior doctors are
  all as ready to help or show me all I want as possible. I in my turn
  do all I can to take extra work which I can do off their hands. Today
  the hospital note-book was handed over to me, and I went round with
  the physicians taking down directions for food, medicines, etc., and
  then making up the latter and taking them to the wards: all of which
  was very little for me to do, and very interesting, but a great deal
  saved for the over-worked junior doctor of the wards. I am really a
  _great_ deal stronger and healthier than I have been for a long time.”

  “Nov. 27th. We get up at 6.30 a.m.,—breakfast at 7, then go round the
  wards with the doctors, then I make up the hospital medicines and see
  what drugs need to be ordered into the dispensary. The Dispensary
  opens at 9, or two days in the week at 10, and on Mondays and
  Thursdays (Dr. Sewall’s days) I am there all the morning, making up
  prescriptions as fast as she writes them (two of us generally have our
  hands full, but sometimes I am alone), and very often we have not got
  through our work when the dinner-bell rings at 1 p.m. Dr. Sewall
  always has an enormous number of patients—from 60 to 70, and if I go
  down into the Dispensary waiting-room I get seized on so eagerly,—‘Is
  Dr. Sewall here herself?’ as she is occasionally obliged to be absent
  part of the time.

  I think anyone who passed a couple of mornings in this dispensary
  would go away pretty well convinced of the enormous advantage of women
  doctors; and one sees daily how the poor women feel it by the crowds
  that come on the four days in the week when the lady physicians are in
  charge, and the handful that comes on the two days when a man
  presides.... They say that they have cases again and again of long-
  standing diseases which the women have borne rather than go to a man
  with their troubles,—and I don’t wonder at it.”

  15th.I have just begun to have a little Sunday service in the wards
  where there was none before. Dr. Sewall is very good in letting me
  make such plans if I like, and comes herself to the service. Of course
  we have a very mixed multitude, but I think we manage to worship our
  ‘Father in Heaven’ and look forward to the ‘One fold’ some day, when
  neither ‘Jerusalem nor this mountain’ shall be the vital thing.”

  “(Dec. 19th.) My chaplain’s work has rather fallen into abeyance now
  from the crush of other things,—the only thing I do regularly being
  the Sunday service, writing a weekly sermon for which, by the bye, is
  not to be omitted in one’s list of work. It’s all but impossible to
  find any printed ones one could read,—one needs to be so absolutely
  non-doctrinal and non-combative; and besides the doctors and people
  will come to hear mine when they’d think twice about anything else.

  The young surgeon I told you about has a splendid voice, and last
  Sunday she brought a sort of large accordion and played all our hymn
  tunes, so we are getting quite grand. Wouldn’t you like, darling, to
  peep in at us and see all our busy doings?—I _wish_ you could.”

To say that the young doctors who came to her services were frankly
critical of her and her beliefs is an understatement of the facts. Some
of their remarks have survived,—clever and flippant for the most part;
but the following letter from an intimate friend, whom she had persuaded
to accompany her to church, is worth quoting:

                                        “Sunday evening, 11 o’clock.

  My dear Baby, I cannot sleep for thinking of the rude speeches I made
  to you this evening. I am so sorry that I said them, but at the same
  time I could not help it,—the whole service and the going to church of
  most all the people there was such a farce that it roused the devil in
  my nature.

  Besides all this, my Baby answered me so sweetly and truly that it did
  me good to make her talk, and raised my faith in human goodness which
  was getting almost extinguished by that man’s sermon. If I ever get
  into such a disagreeable mood again, and say ugly things to tease you,
  you must give me a good moral box on the ear so as to bring me to my
  senses.

  I do not believe that going to church is good for me.

  Don’t think me foolish for writing this, and don’t let anything I said
  today trouble you, but be as good to me as you have been.”

In the midst of all this busy life, S. J.-B. never forgot the family
festivals at home, the birthdays of parents and friends, the date when
such an one was to be married, or another to sail for India. This was a
striking gift, more of the heart than of the head, that she retained
throughout life. “I was thinking in bed this morning of the faithful few
who would remember my poor old birthday,” wrote her childhood’s
schoolmistress, Miss Teed, at this time, “And a little bird whispered,
‘You will get a letter from Sophy.’”

Not that she ever felt bound to say the thing that was expected of her.

“I suppose you don’t expect me to say much about Uncle’s death,
darling,” she writes to her Mother. “It cannot seem to me sad for anyone
concerned. I do not think he would have learned much more here;
doubtless he will hereafter.”

Three weeks before the anniversary of her parents’ wedding, she writes
to her sister:

  “DEAR OLD CHARLIE,—Please keep the enclosed very secret till the
  morning of May 12th.

  Get a grand plant of some sort—full of blossom, geranium or fuchsia or
  something,—any price up to 5s.—and put the letter in its leaves on
  Mother’s plate at breakfast. _Mind_ you get a glorious plant....

                                    Your aff. sis.,
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

From a letter written to her Mother at Christmas 1865 one realizes what
a child she was still:

  “Our rooms did get so prettily decorated,—Dr. Sewall is clever that
  way,—and I took holly round to all the wards that everybody might have
  some bits to look at. We had quite a rush of babies just then—four
  born on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day.—When we were going round the
  wards on Christmas Day Dr. Sewall ordered of course ‘light diet’ for
  the new Mothers,—so I said laughingly to console them, ‘Well, I
  guessed the babies were worth losing a dinner for, weren’t they?’
  ‘Humph!’ says one of the Mothers, ‘a good dinner’s worth more to poor
  folks!’

  To tell the truth I was too much taken aback to reflect what a
  sensible woman she was!—What would _you_ have said, dear?

  Darling, I come more and more to the conclusion that anyone who wishes
  to preserve intact all romantic ideas about ‘Mother’s love,’ etc., had
  better not live in a Lying-in Hospital. It’s a grand and blessed thing
  when it does come, but that isn’t always. We had two of the babies
  born here found deserted in the streets a few days ago,—the day after
  their mothers were discharged.”

On March 4th, 1866, she writes to her Mother:

  “I have given up my Sunday service, or at least have resigned it into
  the hands of a minister who already had a service in the medical
  wards. I found it very hard to find time to prepare properly for it,
  and sometimes it tried my nerves very much, and besides it got to be a
  great weight upon me in the way of responsibility and absolute honesty
  in _what_ I said. Things seem so very un-clear to my own mind that it
  rather weighs upon me and worries me to be trying to say much about
  them to others. Perhaps this state may just pass away again, but in
  the meantime I like best to ‘be true to every honest thought’ and,
  till I’m sure, to be silent.

  Much love to Daddy and Carry, and such a lot of kisses for my darling.

                                   Yours lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

To understand the inner history of this change one must revert to the
diary,—the most intimate friend of all—and this takes us back for a
moment to the time of her arrival in America.

  “June 18th. How thoughts and plans and possibilities rush upon me! The
  opening of the bar to women here,—Mr. Sewall’s wish for a female
  pupil. ‘Ah,’ as I said to L.E.S. last night, ‘if I had been an
  American, I believe I should not have doubted to be a lawyer.’ She
  thinks one _should_ be, if one has the powers and will.

  Yes, but is the ‘dedication’ and vocation of years nothing? Have I
  believed rightly or wrongly that God meant me to do something for
  teaching,—and that in England,—to the almost certain exclusion of all
  other life-work? Rightly, I think.

  Then, again, the ministry. What seems to draw me so irresistibly that
  way? Is it pride or wish of note, or is it vocation? Is it partly Dr.
  Arnold’s belief that Headmaster ought also to be chaplain?...

  One seems at crossways,—‘the tide’ perhaps. Well, _look_,—and surely
  the kindly Light will lead.”

Anyone who had gone through all S.J.-B.’s papers up to this date with an
open mind would have said that the choice really lay between teaching
and preaching. All her life she had been more interested in religious
subjects than in any others, and her gifts of exposition and of public
speaking were far above the average in either sex. In later years, when
she was addressing thousands of people, she could make all hear without
seeming to raise her voice; it remained full, mellow, easy, perfectly
controlled, just as when she sat at the head of her own dinner-table.
She might have spent some considerable part of the day in “wishing
somebody would shoot her,” but no one would have guessed it when the
moment came. “My mind is perfectly at ease when _she_ rises to speak,”
said one of her patients in Edinburgh, many years later, “one feels then
that humanly speaking nothing can go wrong.” As a matter of fact it was
when she was addressing a large audience that she looked most radiantly
happy.

In many ways, then, she would have made a good minister; we know that
she wrote a number of sermons that were appreciated by her colleagues,
and she went so far as to preach at Weymouth (Mass.) for the Rev.
Olympia Brown. “On seeing Him who is invisible” was the subject she
chose, and, judged by ordinary standards, the sermon seems to have been
a success.

The main reason why she did not follow it up was (as indicated in the
last-quoted letter to her Mother) the change that took place in her
religious views after she had lived some time in America. In England she
had been considered an advanced thinker on religious subjects: in
America—the America in which her lot happened to be thrown—she was
amazingly orthodox and conservative. For the first time she found
herself among people who really _did not care_ about religion as she
understood it.

  “July 2nd. Very nice these people are,” she writes in her diary, “and
  very nice Mrs. Rogers’ deep clear interest about the poor and wicked,—
  refuges, etc.

  Yet is there not in them the sort of un-religiousness which half jars
  on one in Unitarians? I wonder _why_. I _hope_ I shan’t get into it.
  ‘_More_ of reverence in us dwell.’ Yet so difficult in throwing off
  old bonds of sentiment not to lose something of the real feeling,—and,
  as Miss Cobbe says, if our religion is not a synthesis of _all_ the
  good and beauty we know, we are less, not more, by rejecting errors.”

And again:

  “A new psychical study in the shape of Mrs. F., who ‘can believe in
  Providence but not in God,’ and who ‘means to say that there is
  absolute right and wrong, but _not_ good and bad people. People were
  born with certain notions and acted accordingly; they did the best
  they could and could do no more.’

  Mr. F. allowing and accepting the consequence that men differed no
  more from brutes than by finer organization, no more than the elephant
  from the fish! It is really good to contrast opposite extremes of
  thought,—it gives one a certain sense of stability and reality to have
  to defend one’s castle on _both_ sides, and so to feel sure that it is
  one’s own at least....

  Talking of struggle as the only root of good, I quoted ‘perfect
  _through_ suffering,’ and spoke of my belief in Christ’s struggle in
  those 30 years as the only possible root of his accordance of will
  with God’s.

  July 16th. Curious how the things most living to me are just simple
  absurdities to another. Talking of tombstones, Mrs. H. doesn’t like
  them, as preventing the dead rising—in idea. Mrs. F.—‘Well, you don’t
  expect them to, do you?’ (as a sort of _reductio ad absurdum_).
  ‘Certainly I do: the Bible says so.’ ‘Oh—aw—ah!’ with such a face,—‘if
  I thought so, I’d take to Banting at once.’”

Curious how none of them seem to have seen that the frivolous remark
involved a great principle!

There were many stories and jokes on biblical themes, and—though S. J.-
B. even at this time was a touchstone in the matter of jokes, never
allowing one to pass which was not funny enough or clever enough to
justify its breadth or its seeming irreverence—her sense of humour was
keen.

  “Suggestion to read the prayer for fair weather,—‘Lor, sir,—not a bit
  of good with the wind in this quarter.’”

But she was constantly reverting to the old religious intensity:

  “How reading of any spiritual conflict—even such an ‘ébauche’ as in
  Agnes of Sorrento—rouses one’s whole nature in a sort of enthusiasm of
  longing and half prophecy!...

  Sometimes I feel such intense sympathy and pity for Christ because of
  his very deification. That after spending his whole life to learn and
  tell men about his Father, he should find them, after his death,
  trying to set him up himself to obscure that Father,—making God a foil
  to Christ!”

With that extraordinary frankness that does such credit to both, she
writes to her Mother at this time,—“I was thinking the other day how
curious it was that I really never read one Unitarian book till I was
altogether Unitarian,[38]—never one but the Bible at least, if that
counts.”

Footnote 38:

  It was only for a very brief period of her life that S. J.-B. would
  have called herself by this name.

“It is strange,” says someone, “that, in all our talk of the evolution
of the individual, we fail to recognize the evolution of the medium.” S.
J.-B. seems to have thought—as so many earnest spirits thought in those
days—that she stood practically alone. “It has so been,” she says in the
same letter to her Mother, “(I can’t say _chanced_) that I have had next
to no human sympathy or help on my way. I do not remember that anyone
but Mrs. Ballantyne has given me much of either in this one strife, and
before I knew her the worst was over.”

One must bear this in mind in reading the passage that follows:

  “To realize more and more that my life will be one—for years if not to
  the end—of struggle and perhaps obloquy, certainly outcasting from the
  synagogue,—struggle theological and social: and will it even succeed
  at last? Yes, surely,—inasmuch as Robertson says how to fall in the
  gap is success,—to be one of the conquering army, if not of the
  conquerors.”

The next entry in the diary is the quotation of a flippant joke about
the Californians who “when they go to a certain warm abode have yet to
send back for their blankets.”

  “July 30th. A very interesting talk with the Fs. ... trying hard to
  show Mrs. F., who longs so to believe in a loving God, ‘Thou wouldst
  not seek me, hadst thou not found me,’—and that to long is almost to
  believe. Also to show her that Christ’s Christianity is a strong true
  manly thing,—that what she deprecates is the letter not the spirit,
  and that her willingness to live, and yet fear to die, without
  Christianity is of the essence of Calvinism.

  With him, still more interesting, (except that one pities and longs to
  help her) about origin of evil, free will, etc. I arguing that God
  _could_ not give men the possibility of virtue without the possibility
  of evil,—he arguing a higher state where evil not possible. I say—then
  you exclude the idea of goodness from God.

  With some effort cleared ideas so far as to detect the ‘undistributed
  middle term,’ to distinguish between the possibility of evil and the
  wish _toward_ evil. Saying that the very truth we prized in
  Unitarianism was that it said ‘Christ, if God, was no example’ and
  that Christ’s very goodness consisted in that he had the possibility
  of evil and no wish for evil.

  Illustrating with May forbidden sugar, in a room with and without it.
  In one case unable to disobey, in the other restrained from the wish
  to disobey.

  The two, confused in one, being absolute opposites.

  Is this all part of my training ‘for the ministry’? Please God. One
  does so gain a clearness never, one trusts, to be lost.

  He asked me tonight if I did not find I had a clearness of thought and
  language very rare; and she said I was the first person who had made
  her feel the intense reality of the invisible and long after it.
  Please God, a prophecy.

  I said I had won through infinite struggle—almost ‘to blood’—a
  certainty to which the visibility of the outer was nothing. And,
  please God, it is deeply true.”

Ah me, Prometheus! The audacity of us small mortals all!

But the words that follow are indeed ‘a prophecy.’

  “I have such a conviction of infinite struggle and contest in the
  future,—yet please God, of earnest, on-pressing struggle, and in the
  end, victory and Rest....

  Oh, dear, the ‘religious’ people and their effects!—very nearly making
  L. E. S. hate the name. So far from all good being ‘in the name of our
  Lord Jesus Christ’ or rather in God’s, there is actually room for the
  reverse to be said;—not wholly truly, I trust though. But she said,
  ‘If I want help for those poor things in or out of hospital, I never
  go near the pious people. I have and I know them. Go to atheists, and
  you are never refused.’

  Oh, dear!”

Knowing the spiritual history of earnest souls in that generation, one
is not surprised to come a couple of months later upon the entry:

  “I am wonderfully unsettled and uneasy somehow.... I do believe this
  terrible sort of logical doubt of Theism that enters in—_not_ un-
  faith, but a failure of the abiding surety—an entrance of the
  admission how possibly _reasonable_ Atheism may be—hurts horribly.

  And then isn’t the whole world void?

  Oh for the ‘_I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not_‘!—and
  doubtless one has it,—both in ’_Neither pray I for these alone_,’ and
  also in those who live and love one, Mother and Octa....

  L.’s absence of sympathy weighs heavily. Hitherto all my friends have
  met me here,—she does not. ‘All the help she ever got, she got from
  herself and her will.’ Not from the Bible or hymns, etc. She calls
  herself a theist, but it seems to me to run close to practical
  atheism....”

  “Oct. 29th. She _is_ so good! Told her something of today’s pain, she
  so sympathizing and good! Believed that the struggle was part of the
  sequence of early training and later reaction into ‘wider faith’—what
  many had to go through one time or another. I spoke of herself,—asked
  her what practical difference she would find if an atheist. ‘Not much
  generally,’ she thought, but in trouble she did pray. She couldn’t
  help it, and believed it was good, and when her friends died she was
  happier. ‘When she thought of it, she felt very sure about God, but
  very seldom did stop to think. She was sure her first duty was her
  work, etc. and then she had small time and sense left.

  I said lives not continually lived as seeing Him who is invisible
  would be worth but little; she said Then her’s was so, and many
  others. So I retracted hastily. ‘At least _mine_ would be.’

  Perhaps her’s is actually higher and more childlike. ‘He will care for
  my soul,’[39] as it were.”

  “Nov. 13th. Looking at p. 253, ‘the Ministry?’, I ask whether the sort
  of spiritual speechlessness—almost deadness—is not perhaps a merciful
  answer to that question. Clearly I can’t preach now.”

  “Nov. 24th. This temptation to medicine is pretty strong in some ways,
  both as to present study and future life.... But ‘not each on all’
  come the claims,—_this_ is surely already responded to, and will
  surely grow without me.

  I feel as if my work would not [how little she knew!] as if, at least,
  it was given _me_ to do and needed most of all my labour.

  So ’Traveller, hold thy cloak’!

  While it was identical with life interests and labour am I to claim
  ‘vocation,’ and then when others open, forsake it?

  ‘Shalt not excel.’”

  “Nov. 25th. I cannot but believe that if God enables me ... to do my
  work as I have believed and planned it, it will do wider, deeper good
  for England than the addition of one woman doctor can.[40]

  And then if I say,—‘Ah, but see how my theology will impede me!—well,
  would you have everyone give up working but those who hold the popular
  views?—is it not just those whose views have changed who need to work
  and justify them, and not hide light under a bushel at call of
  indolence or cowardice? You know that you believe in the horrible harm
  of leaving education to Calvinists, downtreading and hardening earth
  round the root,—that you believe in children being taught ‘the two
  commandments’ and no more,—and yet, because you would so teach them,
  you half shrink from the battle through which you must do it.

  L. E. S. says, ‘If you feel you can and wish to be a doctor, you
  ought.’ Ah, but I _can_ do the other too. And if it is only selfish or
  worldly considerations that sway you to medicine—if it is the interest
  or the power or the success, mainly or wholly—if it is the
  difficulties present or future that make you half yearn to turn from
  the other—surely these are no reasons.

  Surely, having presented ourselves, our souls and bodies, a reasonable
  sacrifice, these things no longer enter in.”

Footnote 39:

  The reference is probably to the reply of Wilberforce when asked
  whether in his struggle for the emancipation of the slaves, he was not
  neglecting his own soul,—“I had forgotten that I had a soul.”

Footnote 40:

                     “But thou wouldst not _alone_
                     Be saved, my father! _alone_
                     Conquer and come to thy goal,
                     Leaving the rest in the wild.
                      *     *     *     *     *
                     ... to thee it was given
                     Many to save with thyself;
                     And, at the end of the day,
                     O faithful shepherd! to come,
                     Bringing thy sheep in thy hand.”

In view of all that was to follow, it is interesting that, in turning to
Medicine, she should suspect herself of ‘half shrinking from the
battle.’ Here is proof, if proof were needed, that while half of her
enjoyed the fray, the other half had to be dragged, an unwilling
captive, begging always to lie down and be at peace.

  “The Medicine fascinates me.... If I resume teaching, it will be grand
  to have an M.D. for head of College: if not, why Medicine is a ‘good
  work,’ and if I am led up to it, it may be mine after all.

  But won’t E.G. be cross?”

Here are two pleasant little sidelights on the situation—from letters to
her Mother:

  “(Jan. 21st. 1866.) And, darling, do you know that the doctor has such
  a splendid temper, and is so infinitely gentle, that I really believe
  she is improving mine,—because I’m absolutely ashamed to be cross to
  anybody so good. Suppose I come home angelic, dear?”

Her best friends would have said there was no great cause for anxiety on
that score.

  “(Feb. 6th.) Yes, dear, I mean to be a thoroughly good nurse for you
  at any rate, if ever you need me; as to ‘Doctor too,’ I can’t say. I
  should like to be enough of one at least to know how to save you some
  pain. I listen to and learn specially everything that I think can ever
  help my darling,—it would be grand to be of some use and comfort to
  her if she was ill.”

A few weeks later she wrote to Mrs. Unwin:

                                        “13 Pleasant Street, Boston.
                                             March 3rd. 1866.

  MY DEAR LUCY,

        I hope you are quite prepared to renew your invitation to me for
  next summer, for I’m beginning to think seriously of my visit home,
  and I want very much to see you! I say my ‘visit’ for I have been so
  well and strong since I came to America, and have found so much to
  interest me, that I think it very likely I may come back here after
  seeing all my home folks....

  I am so glad to hear that you have got Alice with you, and expect to
  like her. She is a real friend of mine, and a very true and valuable
  one.... I only hope you will let her take as good care of you as she
  used to do of me....

  Whenever you feel energetic enough to enjoy a chat by pen and paper, I
  shall be very pleased to hear of your doings. Pray tell me all about
  the Baby—of course the most wonderful of his kind—and be sure, dear
  child, that I shall care very much to hear and know about everything
  that concerns you.

  Please give the enclosed lines to A. I shall enjoin her to feed you up
  no end, and whenever we do meet, be sure I shall ask if you let
  yourself be taken proper and sensible care of. I believe in food and
  rest as just the best doctors in creation—with all my new medical
  lights!

  Goodbye, dear child. With every good wish for you in the New Year, I
  am,

                          Yours affectionately,
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

All through this time her happy letters had been giving no small
pleasure to the “old folks” at home.

                                          “Brighton. 18th Dec. 1865.

  DEAREST,

        Your welcome letter arrived a day or two before the 17th., but
  dear Mother kept it back till _the_ morning. Thanks for all your good
  wishes. One thing you can always do,—pray for me,—and that, I trust,
  you will do daily. I have constant faith in prayer simply offered up
  to our heavenly Father through the one mediator between God and man. I
  believe it never fails.

  I am rejoiced you are so quiet at Boston, and have employment that
  interests you, but even that work will hurt you, remember, if you have
  too much of it. You want _rest_, dearest child, and only light
  agreeable work on your hands. I wish I could see Dr. Sewall, to give
  her a Father’s heartfelt thanks for all her loving kindness to you.
  She is indeed an invaluable friend. If I am to see her, she must come
  to Europe, for I shall never cross the Atlantic.... I am _very_ glad
  you are so well, and your letters are so cheery that they are a great
  pleasure.

  We are all, thank God, fairly well, and are to have Tom and his wife,
  and four (I think) of the children here after Christmas. On Thursday
  last, at 2 a.m. their house was on fire, and till 2.30 a.m. he did not
  expect to save the house; and had there been a high wind, nothing
  could have saved it probably. Mercifully it was a still night and
  everything went well. Two engines were on the spot rapidly, in perfect
  order,—plenty of water close by, and the superintendent very active
  and intelligent. No crowd, and the entrances kept clear by respectable
  known men: and by three o’clock every spark was out.

  The children were sent off rapidly to the school-house, and all _five_
  (baby being put elsewhere) put in Miss Temple’s bed! Nobody has been
  hurt,—a few colds and that seems all. Our God be praised. How
  different it might have been!

                                Your affecte Father,
                                                      T. JEX-BLAKE.”

And the Mother writes:

  “Jan. 29th. 1866.... You were very good and very right not to attempt
  to enter yet as a student....

  I had much rather _know_ you well and happy there than see you ill and
  know you worried here. If they would only have the Cable, I think
  Boston no distance. I should certainly like the Cable,—but I don’t
  hear a word about it. Couldn’t you apply to Government?”

  “Feb. 20th. I hope your medical education is progressing, and that you
  don’t addle your brains. I shall expect you to make something on the
  way home by your medical knowledge.”

  “Mar. 5th. It is such a repose and joy to me to hear of your being
  occupied so usefully and happily, and feeling comparatively well,
  though I suspect sometimes my little one is a wee overdone.”

The medical study was more or less of a joke so far to her friends at
home, and many are the enquiries as to when she means to return and go
on with her life after this interesting digression.

  “I am very glad you find things and people pleasant in America,”
  writes Mrs. Unwin. “I hope they won’t be so nice that they will tempt
  you to stay there very long, for I shall be very glad when I can think
  of you again without that great sea between us. I do so want a long
  talk with you about no end of things. I don’t think I ever wanted you
  more than when I was ill.”

And Mr. Unwin expressed the view of many when he wrote:

  “If I told you of the estimate in which I hold the purpose to which
  you are devoting your life, you would suspect me of flattery, so I
  abstain; but, barring all that, your friends in England are in great
  need of you, and I think it is very horrid that you should leave them
  all, to whom you would be of infinite service, on God knows what
  outlandish errand. They all grudge you to Boston entirely, so pray be
  quick and come back.”

Dr. Sewall, on the other hand, had become not a little dependent on her
competent helper, and, although this friendship too was not without the
“cataracts and breaks” to which S. J.-B. so often refers in her diary,
there is no doubt that the older and gentler woman found it not only a
pleasure but a great asset. “How I wish I had you here: I do so want
your _strength_! So few people are strong,” is a sentiment that recurs
in her letters many times from now to the end of her life.

So in June 1866, S. J.-B. returned to England to see her parents, and to
talk over the whole question of her future career with them and with
other friends.

  “Most people are much more in favour of Medicine than I expected,” she
  writes, “except Miss Garrett, who thinks me not specially suited, and
  E. S. M., who thinks it indecent of unmarried women knowing all about
  these things.”

  “July 8th. Sunday. ‘Taller,’ say Laurence, Mother and self. ‘More
  firmly knit,’ say do. ‘Muscles like iron, as if rowing all morning and
  prize-fighting all afternoon,’ says Nigger.

  Well done America and L. E. S.!—bless her.”

Almost at the same moment Dr. Sewall was writing:

  “I really feel quite well satisfied with the increase in my practice,
  and if it continues to increase for the next two years as well, we
  shall be able to take a fine house and live in style. I cannot tell
  you how much pleasure I get out of anticipating our house-keeping.
  When I am too tired to do anything, I lay on the sofa and plan and
  plan and think what a good time we are going to have, and am as happy
  as a cricket.”

So America won the day, though not without many questionings.

  “August 12th. Sunday. On Sunday last at Mrs. Hyde’s suggestion wrote
  to Macmillan. On Tuesday heard from him, and had a ‘book—not too
  short’ warmly accepted by him, at ‘no risks and half profits.’

  So we gradually come to our wishes when we have ceased to look for
  them. I accept it almost as I did the preaching,—because I _had_ so
  longed for it.

  This day three weeks on the Atlantic,—5 weeks, home to L. E. S., I
  trust. Study Medicine? ... or push on in literary career now opening
  apparently?

  How about conflicting interests and powers hereafter? If my book—
  _inter alia_—brings me to notice of Commission,[41] etc.,—cry off from
  my chance because too busy as a doctor?

  Ah, well,—long way off yet! Do the work ‘lies nearest thee’ and leave
  the rest!”

Footnote 41:

  The Schools Inquiry Commission, presumably.




                               CHAPTER XV
                        PIONEER WORK IN AMERICA


On September 1st, 1866, S. J.-B. sailed again for America. A warm
welcome awaited her, and she speedily fell back into her niche at the
Women’s Hospital. Her main interest for the first month or two was the
writing of her book on _A Visit to Some American Schools and Colleges_,
the manuscript of which was duly despatched to Macmillan in November.
Based though it avowedly was on somewhat limited observations, and
dealing with a transient stage of a great subject, the book was
extraordinarily fair and clear, and was greeted with genuine respect by
those who were qualified to form an opinion. What was equally important,
it made really excellent reading. At the close of a four column review
the _Athenaeum_ said:

  “An English teacher, whose special avocations enabled her to gain
  prompt attention from American instructors, and qualified her to
  detect the true worth and significance of the facts brought under her
  notice, Miss Jex-Blake has written a sensible and entertaining book
  upon an important subject; and, while we thank her for some valuable
  information, we venture to thank her also for the very agreeable
  manner in which she imparts it.”

  “Redolent with common sense and practical suggestions,” said _The
  Stationer_.

How sane a view she took of the whole subject may be gathered from the
quotations given in the appendix.[42]

Footnote 42:

  Appendix C.

Having happily despatched her book, she was free to give her whole mind
to the subject of Medicine, and she seems

now to have enrolled formally as a medical student. In any case we hear
of her dissecting—when material could be got—and finding, in the
stimulus this gave to her work, a new interest and fascination.

Excellent work was done at that Women’s Hospital in Boston, as a number
of our English women doctors have had reason to testify: sickness was
relieved, and—what is quite as much to the point—competent and able
doctors were turned out year by year. But of course the scholastic side
of the work was on a very different level. Even for those days, the
practical scientific education, and, above all, the sheer supply of
material, were inadequate in the extreme. Then as now, of course, it was
true that “la carrière ouverte aux talents,” and when women doctors were
so rare there was little doubt that a competent woman would make her
way. Certainly it was not the hallmark of a good University degree that
helped her, for good Universities existed for the male sex only.
Graduation in America to this day may mean a great deal or it may mean
just nothing at all. It was not the fault of the woman doctor of that
period if her “degree” was one that failed to inspire the enthusiasm of
those that understood.

Now S. J.-B.’s entry on any new sphere in life could seldom be fitly
described as the addition of a little more of the same stuff. For better
or worse, she was apt to come somewhat as the yeast comes to the dough,
and yet that metaphor, too, falls short, for the medium reacted upon her
as intensely perhaps as she acted on the medium. In the present case she
had drifted into medical work all uncritical and full of admiration[43];
but a visit to England brought her back as an outsider with her critical
faculty fully awake. She saw that the need of adequate Graduation—urgent
though it might be—was as nothing compared to the need of adequate
Education. It _was_ hard to make bricks without straw. In America women
doctors had proved, against heavy odds, that women doctors were wanted.
Why not give them a fair field? One heard on every side of the splendid
advantages laid, so to speak, at the feet of men students at Harvard.

Footnote 43:

  As early as June, 1866, she had written to Dr. Sewall:—“I am glad you
  are pleased with prospects as to the College; but, however good you
  may get it to be, take notice (if I study at all) I don’t mean to
  graduate at any Woman’s College,—on principle,—or else for vanity and
  ambition sake,—which is it?” Whichever it was, there can be no doubt
  as to the soundness of the decision, but she little guessed what that
  decision was to cost.

Why should not women be admitted to Harvard?

Why not ask?

In April, 1867, the following correspondence was published in _The
Boston Daily Advertiser_:

                                                  “March 11th. 1867.

  GENTLEMEN,

        Finding it impossible to obtain elsewhere in New England a
  thoroughly competent medical education, we hereby request permission
  to enter the Harvard Medical School on the same terms and under the
  same conditions as other students, there being, as we understand, no
  university statute to the contrary.

  On applying for tickets for the course, we were informed by the Dean
  of the Medical Faculty that he and his coadjutors were unable to grant
  them to us in consequence of some previous action taken by the
  corporation, to whom now therefore we make request to remove any such
  existing disability. In full faith in the words recently spoken with
  reference to the University of Harvard,—‘American colleges are not
  cloisters for the education of a few persons, but seats of learning
  whose hospitable doors should be always open to every seeker after
  knowledge’—we place our petition in your hands and subscribe
  ourselves,

                                      Your obedient servants,
                                                   SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.
                                                   SUSAN DIMOCK.[44]

  To the President and Fellows of the University of Harvard.”

Footnote 44:

  Miss Susan Dimock was a student of great promise who afterwards
  completed her education at Zurich. She was lost at sea in the wreck of
  the steamer _Schiller_ in May 1875.

                               “Harvard University. April 8th. 1867.

  MY DEAR MADAM,

        After consultation with the faculty of the Medical College, the
  corporation direct me to inform you and Miss Dimock that there is no
  provision for the education of women in any department of this
  university.

  Neither the corporation nor the faculty wish to express any opinion as
  to the right or expediency of the medical education of women, but
  simply to state the fact that in our school no provision for that
  purpose has been made, or is at present contemplated.

                                Very respectfully yours,
                                                        THOMAS HILL.

  Miss S. Jex-Blake.”

A few days later the following paragraph appeared in _The Advocate_:

  “_The Beginning of the End._ A correspondence between the President
  and two lady applicants for admission to the Medical School was
  published some days since in the ‘Boston Advertiser.’ We understand
  that the friends of female education have no notion of resting
  satisfied with their first rebuff; and that prominent Alumni of Boston
  are already taking measures for the prolonged agitation of the
  question.”

A month later S.J.-B. had obtained introductions to each of the
professors in the Medical Faculty at Harvard, and to each member of the
staff of the Massachusetts General Hospital and of the Eye and Ear
Infirmary: as well as to many people of standing connected with these
various institutions: and she now proceeded to canvass them
systematically. In addition to a number of influential friends, she was
ably supported by Miss Dimock.

On the whole their reception was encouraging. The individual letters,
indeed, are so favourable, that the hopes of the inexperienced young
applicants must have run high. The following from Dr. Oliver Wendell
Holmes is typical of some half dozen at least:

  “I should not only be willing, but I should be much pleased, to
  lecture to any number of ladies for whom we can find accommodation in
  the anatomical lecture room, always provided that any special subject
  which seemed not adapted for an audience of both sexes should be
  delivered to the male students alone.”

Dr. Brown-Séquard is even more emphatic in a letter to Dr. Holmes:

  “MY DEAR PROFESSOR,

        Miss Blake, who will hand you this note, wishes me to say that I
  am strongly in favour of the admission of persons of her sex at the
  Medical College. As such is my decided opinion, I write very
  willingly.

                                Very faithfully yours,
                                               C. E. BROWN-SÉQUARD.”

The corporation of Harvard, however, exerted its power to veto any such
inclinations on the part of individual professors.

S. J.-B. quotes the above and a number of similar letters in the diary,
and adds the comment:

  “All which ends in ... smoke!”

There were always flashes of humour to temper the various
disappointments.

  “Those wise men of Gotham at the Eye and Ear think it ‘the kindest and
  most gentlemanly thing’ to shut us out after all!”

  “Dr. A. ‘not afraid of responsibility, of course’—only—he’d rather not
  admit us till other people do”!

Here is the official letter from the wise men of Gotham:

                    “Massachusetts Charitable Eye and Ear Infirmary.
                                      June 18th, 1867.

  DEAR MADAM,

        The surgeons of this Infirmary are, at the same time, members of
  the Massachusetts Medical Society, and are bound to respect the
  opinion of its Councillors. And in view of the recent action of that
  Board, we are of opinion that we cannot continue to allow female
  students to attend our cliniques. Ungracious as is the task, we
  therefore feel compelled to ask you to suspend your visits.

  We have no hesitation in adding that our intercourse with yourself and
  companions has been throughout most pleasant to us personally.

                            Very truly yours,
                                              HASKET DERBY,
                                                   for the Surgeons.

  Miss Sophia Jex-Blake.”

A certain amount of clinical teaching in the Massachusetts General
Hospital the women did obtain, and for this they were duly grateful,
though it only made them feel more keenly the deficiencies of their
lecture-room and laboratory training. And, even in hospital, they walked
with a constant sense of insecurity, as one member of the staff was
keenly opposed to the presence of women, and was on the look-out for
causes of offence. Little by little S. J.-B. began to feel the wear and
tear.

  “July 5th. Rest yesterday, but altogether weighed down yesterday and
  today with the fear and horror of this irritability which seems so
  fatally unconquerable,” she writes in her diary.

And one knows how terrible an enemy that irritability was.

Fortunately, a few weeks later, she and Dr. Sewall got away together for
a holiday; and this, apparently, was the first of the long series of
driving-tours which were to prove the great joy and recreation of an
arduous life.

                                “Tuesday. July 30th. Atlantic House,
                                     ‘Town of Wells,’ Maine.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        As I have a spare hour, I may as well use it to chat a little to
  you about the oddities of our journey.

  I wrote to you from Newbury where we stayed one night at the Merrimac
  House,—having slept the previous night at the Agawam House, Ipswich
  (!)—both Indian names, of course. Yesterday we drove (as I told you at
  the end of my last letter) from Newbury port to Portsmouth, and were
  uncertain when I wrote whether to stay or go farther. It had been a
  hot day, but, after posting your letter, a violent rainstorm came up,
  deluging the streets for about 20 minutes about 5½ p.m.

  After it was over, everything looked so cool and clear that Dr. Sewall
  was anxious to get on, though I was a little afraid of the heavy
  roads. So we set out soon after six, and had a most delicious drive at
  first. By-and-bye, however, we came to terribly wet clay roads and
  could only go at a walk. Our horse got tired and it began to get dark,
  and we found that the distance to go was even longer than we had been
  told.

  It’s hard for you to understand the sort of society in these country
  places,—no gentry and no peasantry—almost all small farmers doing
  their own work and owning house and land, with some education but no
  polish. We stopped at two or three houses, scattered at wide
  intervals,—and enquired for lodgings, but with no success till after
  dark when we got to a house belonging to a widow woman who informed us
  we could come in and have bed and food, but there was ‘no one in the
  house but her,—no one for the horse.’ However, I was perfectly ready
  to act groom, so in we drove to such a queer loose sort of yard, where
  I unharnessed by very uncertain lantern light, and then the doctor and
  I had a tremendous job getting our phaeton into a queer coach-house up
  a sort of hillock!

  Then the lantern led on to the ‘barn,’ which (here as usual) meant
  also stable, and soon I found myself plunging in the dark through soft
  masses which proved to be long wet grass, leading my horse by the
  halter. Then up among big loose stones, and up a step more than 1½
  foot high into a barn so low that my horse all but hit his head. Then
  over some boards set edgewise to divide off stalls ... the good woman
  being amazed at my venturing in ‘with the horse’!

  Then a queer hunt in the half darkness for a pail for water and wooden
  box for Indian meal (which, stirred with water, often replaces oats
  here), and then to bed, tired enough!

  This morning I groomed the horse, and, so doing, found a stone in his
  foot, fed him, and we between us washed the carriage. You may tell
  Daddy I had no idea what hard work it was before! We washed a long
  while at it, and somehow it wouldn’t look _quite_ clean at last.

  (N.B. Why _will_ water dry muddy on to a carriage?)

  Then we drove on again some distance and found a place for dinner,—one
  of the big boarding-houses like what I was in at Compton,—and then on
  again. Dr. Sewall began to get tired when we were still 5 or 6 miles
  from our next point, Kennebunk,—and seeing a notice on a bye-road,
  ‘Atlantic House 3/4 mile’—we drove down,—found a charming inn almost
  on the sands, close to the Atlantic,—fresh and bright and airy, and
  settled here for the night. If you only knew what my afflictions are
  in American country inns,—I have hardly seen decent food in one since
  I left Boston—you may imagine my satisfaction at getting here the best
  supper I have had yet,—excellent fresh fish, lobsters, etc., and
  currants, and nice bread, and milk. Altogether the best table we’ve
  found yet.

  It sounds natural, too, to hear the roar of the Atlantic as I write,—
  only it seems sometimes to murmur, ‘Over the sea!’

  But then it always makes me feel nearer home to see the actual water
  which is the only thing between us,—of which you at Brighton see but
  another part.

  _Wednesday._... We have spent the day quietly here, and shall very
  likely drive to Portland in one day tomorrow,—30 miles is not much for
  a rested horse. He has not been out today, except for a short drive on
  the broad smooth sands which stretch for miles here.

  It is deliciously cool here by the ocean,—Dr. Sewall says ‘cold,’ and
  borrows my old blue jacket.

  It is very pleasant and restful after Boston. If Portland is hot, we
  may return here for a few days on our way back.

  Goodbye, darling. Yours lovingly,

                                                              SOPH.”

                                               “Atlantic House,
                                                   August 9th. 1867.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        Here we are staying again on the very verge of the Atlantic,
  having found Portland more gay than restful, and desiring some perfect
  quiet before we get home again.

  Your letter of July 25th has been forwarded to me with a long one from
  Carry, and one from an old schoolfellow of mine who had seen and liked
  my book, and so bethought herself to write to me and say so. She is a
  governess now.

  I should like to see that review in the Pall Mall,—perhaps some of you
  will send it to me,—and _any_ others of which you hear....

  “August 11th. Sunday evening. We have been spending the afternoon
  ‘camping out’ in the midst of some woods (Haywards Heath fashion)
  letting our horse graze and enjoying the cool and quiet. We have one
  more day here and then go on towards home, and expect to get there on
  Friday. Soon after—in September probably—we shall make another
  attempt, aided by Mr. Loring, and, I hope, by Prof. Rogers (have you
  seen him?) to get into Harvard or to get some advantages out of them;
  and I suppose on our success will depend a good deal what we do in the
  winter....

  The Doctor begs me to send her love. I do hope you may know her by
  this time next year. Don’t you?

  Love to all. Tell Carry I’ll write soon in answer to hers.

                                              Yours lovingly, SOPH.”

  “I think what you say is true about the difficulties of ‘Joint
  Education’ in England,” she writes to her brother in answer to a
  criticism of her book. “Myself, I care very little about it if both
  sexes can somehow get all the education they want or wish for.”

There is little record of the winter’s work, though the following rough
draft—in S.J.-B.’s handwriting—of an appeal to Harvard has been
preserved:

                                                         “Jan. 1868.

  GENTLEMEN,

        Having during the past year been granted access to the clinical
  advantages of the Massachusetts General Hospital, but finding it
  impossible anywhere in New England to obtain adequate theoretical
  instruction in Medicine, we now earnestly entreat you to reconsider
  the subject of the admission of women to the lectures at Harvard
  Medical School,—such admission being, as we understand, forbidden by
  no past or present statute of the University.

  We do not wish to enter on the vexed question of the capability or
  non-capability of women for the practice of Medicine, as we believe
  that time and experience only can furnish its true answer, but we now
  present our urgent petition that some opportunity may be afforded us
  for the thorough study of the medical science and art, that we may be
  granted at least some of the advantages that are not denied to every
  man, and allowed to show whether we are or are not worthy to make use
  of them.

  We are willing, Gentlemen, to submit to any required examination, to
  qualify ourselves according to any given standard, to furnish any
  personal references, and to abide by any restrictions and regulations
  which may seem proper to the Corporation or to the Faculty.

  Several of the Professors having expressed their personal willingness
  to allow us to attend their lectures, we earnestly request that the
  Corporation will authorize our admission to those classes into which
  the respective Professors do not object to receive us, and that, in
  any case where the Professors does so object, we may be allowed to
  receive private instruction from some medical gentleman approved by
  the Faculty, whose lectures shall in our case be held equivalent to
  those given to the College classes in the same subject.”

  “Fighting on for Harvard with a sort of dull persistency,” she records
  in her diary in March 1868, “expecting another answer from the
  Corporation on the 11th.

  Well, having been in Mass. Hospital for 8 months is something. With
  all my dull atheism, I do believe somehow the Best will be,—if not
  this, another. ‘And so far have brought me—to put me to shame’?”

Many entries in the diary about this time prove that she was passing
through that veritable “dark night of the soul” that has lain in the
path of so many bright spirits of her generation.

  “I suppose it isn’t till the whole world—and oneself—breaks away under
  one that one does know what rubbish one is made of,—‘dust and
  ashes.... And what fine things I started with! Sir Launfal[45] and
  gilded armour, etc. To conquer all the giants and beam Christian
  charity everywhere.

  I believe old folks _do_ ‘know young folks to be fools.’

  A nice result at near 28—Chaos!—with a possible sawbones in futuro!”

Footnote 45:

  Some few intimate friends will recall the evenings, 30 or 40 years
  later, round the study fire at Windydene, when the white-haired woman
  would recite _Sir Launfal_ from beginning to end with a subdued
  enthusiasm that was more expressive than pages of commentary.

  “Jan. 21st. 1868. ‘Quid sum miser tunc dicturus’!

  Eight and twenty!—‘and a sinner!’”

One must bear in mind always, of course, that a diary is apt to reflect
the graver side of a character, the side that associates, and even
friends, would scarcely guess at. Certainly the letters to “the dear old
folks” bear small witness to this stress and strain. They recount all
sorts of innocent adventures and happy doings which were quite as real—
one is glad to believe—as the strong crying and tears of the night
watches.

                                                “13 Pleasant Street,
                                                   Boston, U.S.
                                              Monday, Jan. 27th. 68.

  DARLING MOTHER

        Such a sleigh ride as we had yesterday I hope you’ll never
  have,—and indeed I don’t care about repeating the dose myself! I drove
  the doctor eight or nine miles in a pelting snow-storm, partly across
  open country, long bridges and marshes, etc., the thermometer
  somewhere about 10° or 15°, a good deal of wind, which always makes it
  feel much colder, and the sharp crystals of snow cutting into our
  faces and eyes like so many pin points and causing actual pain.
  Towards the end I found it rather hard to see,—some white things
  seemed to get in front of my eyes;—what do you think they were? Solid
  icicles hanging from all my eye-lashes on the side exposed to the
  wind,—frozen together into three or four solid little balls as big as
  small peas, and partly freezing the lids together! When I got in I
  called Eliza to see them,—you should have heard her ‘Gracious
  goodness!’

  Even sealskin gloves fail one in such stormy cold,—one’s hands freeze
  and have to be thawed out as regards sensation several times in a
  drive! So we carry hot bottles to do it with, and Dr. Sewall laughed
  at the figure I cut yesterday, driving with one hand, the other
  grasping a big two-quart bottle upright on my lap, and my head bent on
  one side like a lapwing’s to see out of the one eye that wasn’t frozen
  up!

  She herself offered to drive again and again, but speed was my object,
  and I always make the horse go half as fast again as she does. He did
  gallantly yesterday,—the roads and streets were clear, and we spun
  over the white frozen surface at eight or ten miles an hour.

  When it is not actually snowing, sleighing is very exhilarating,—the
  horse has a light load and is generally in good spirits,—sleigh-bells
  jangling merrily, etc.”

                                                         “March 6th.

  ... A few days ago one of the women who had been confined here was
  fetched home by her husband, and with him came a rather big dog of the
  setter or lurcher kind, I think, or rather a cross on one of them. The
  folks went away, and so did the dog, but in half an hour he was back
  again, scratching at the Hospital door. He was fetched again by the
  man and again ran back, no one having, so far as I know, petted or
  enticed him at all. Then he was refused admission or turned out on the
  street, and when his master came again for him I believe he found him
  on the street; but in the evening there came a scratching at _our_
  hall door—not the Hospital,—and in walked the same dog again! I knew
  nothing of the previous story, but remembered having seen him with the
  man who came to our house to see Dr. Sewall, so I took him in. From
  that moment he attached himself to me, so that he follows every step I
  take, and whines at any door I enter without him. As the man didn’t
  come again for him, I drove to his house this morning,—the dog
  following close to the sleigh all the way (some two miles), and when
  he got there the dog greeted his master certainly, but directly I rose
  to go, up he jumped after me. So, as _his_ choice seemed to be made, I
  offered the man $5 (15s. 6d.) for him, and now am undisputed owner of
  my loyal friend!

  It is rather queer, for I had been wishing for a dog of my own, and,
  though he is not a great beauty, he has a nice face, is very obedient,
  clean, and, I think, intelligent,—though Dr. Sewall professes to
  disdain him for being ‘so big’!—and then one can’t help liking even a
  dog who so plainly declares ‘elective affinity.’”[46]

Footnote 46:

  The dog was named Turk, and became a devoted friend.

In the midst of all these new interests she had not forgotten the
question of education at Bettws-y-Coed, and she was deeply interested in
the maturing plans for a new school there. She writes to her Mother:

  “I am glad to understand that you have bought, not the first bit of
  ground, but another near it. I hope Carry will soon send me some idea
  of her plans, though, of course, we can’t build for some months. I
  enclose a very rough sketch of what would be my own idea of a
  schoolroom with gallery at one end and with classroom at the other,—
  and besides the class room a sort of lobby with second entrance and
  with stairs leading to the rooms above for Anne. The porch to have
  places to hang hats, etc., as also under the gallery (as at Hastings).

  I can’t remember about dimensions, though I have a sort of idea that,
  when we spoke of building before, we planned our schoolroom at 18 ft.
  by 28, and 10 ft. or 11 ft. high, the class room to be perhaps 11 ft.
  by 8.

  Ask Carry to see how that agrees with the standard space for 100
  children.”

The school was actually built in 1869, everything being done in a
fashion characteristic of the Jex-Blake family. They gave what was
needed, but not in such a spirit as to discourage the generosity of
others. The landlord gave the site—for a purely nominal rent,—together
with permission to take what stone was needed from a neighbouring
quarry. Farmers and others did the carting for love. For years the Jex-
Blakes had been educating a competent girl—a former pupil—as mistress.
Local sympathy and appreciation, combined with the persevering interest
of the founders, were the very life-blood of the school. How much finer
this than the building of an ornamental edifice that should hand down
the name of the donor to future generations.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In March 1868 S. J.-B. gave up Boston in despair for the moment, and
went to New York, where she had the support of Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell
and her sister Emily, both of whom had plans for the more adequate
medical education of women, and were organizing special classes. S. J.-
B. also persuaded the Head Demonstrator of Anatomy at Bellevue to give
her and another woman student a course of private lessons in Dissecting
and Practical Anatomy.

  “March 28th. Saturday. Began dissecting with Dr. Moseley ... oh, dear,
  isn’t it good to have some real teaching at last!

  By-the-bye, the Blackwells think they could get us into Bellevue if
  Harvard refuses. New York for 3 winters? Shall I bring Alice or what?
  They want English ladies to come and make a class, and offer to
  receive them into the Infirmary. (But English ladies are not given to
  dine in kitchens on poor kitchen fare, etc.)

  Is my old idea ever to work out by O. H. studying medicine? _Wouldn’t_
  she be a good doctor!

  By-the-bye, challenged by the Blackwells as ‘to whose management (in
  re English Female University) would inspire me with £1000 confidence,’
  I say, O. H., Miss M., etc.”

She wrote delightful long letters to Dr. Sewall about the _minutiae_ of
her work, and was somewhat concerned as to how the little Boston world
was getting on without her.

  “I am glad that you find out (as I told you you would) that I did do
  one or two little things while you wondered how I spent my time. I
  wish, however, that you had someone to do them now,—I am afraid you
  will get so tired. I shall ask Eliza if you eat properly. Tell her
  that I mean to write to her next time.

  The little book of your bills is on my shelf in my secretary,—a small
  account book. Don’t muddle the things in looking for it. Be sure and
  put down in it all the bills you send out. Can’t you get Miss Call to
  write them for you? She really can _write_ (unusual in the N.E.H.)....

  Tell me if Eliza does nicely,—tell her I asked after her and her
  housekeeping and Robert.

  I am glad that my son Turk behaves better as he grows older. Give him
  an extra bone with my blessing.”

To her Mother she writes a long account of her difficulty in finding
rooms at a reasonable price.

  “So living in New York is neither easy nor cheap, you see, ... I
  hardly know how I shall manage if I go to a medical college this
  winter, and have to pay all lecture expenses, etc., besides living,—
  for women have to incur extra expense in all sorts of ways, because
  they can’t share the arrangements of some sorts made for men....

  ... while studying, Miss Garrett had, I know, to spend lots of money,—
  paying £50 for a single course of lectures which the men got (in
  class) for £5 each.

  When there was an idea of my taking the Manchester College, Daddy was
  willing to advance me £1000 or £2000 for the start, instead of part of
  the income he allowed me;—do you think he would be willing to do some
  such thing now? I suppose it is hard for you at home who don’t realize
  exactly the hard battle we are fighting (especially to get into the
  good medical colleges) to see how very important it is not to be
  stopped from seizing every bit of advantage obtainable for want of
  money. And it unfortunately happens that most of the women who are
  studying Medicine really _cannot_ get money even when most necessary.

  When I began I had no idea of going into any of this,—but somehow one
  gets talking to Mother of what is uppermost in one’s mind sometimes.

  And I know Mother wants to hear all my bothers and perplexities.

  Much love, darling, to Daddy and Carry.

                                       Yours lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

  “April 12th. Notwithstanding all the discomforts in the way of board,
  I have been gaining greatly by my stay here. I have had a better
  opportunity for dissecting, etc., than ever before, and besides have
  learnt a good deal at the daily medical lessons which take place at
  Dr. Blackwell’s every afternoon. If I am to be a doctor at all, I mean
  to be a thoroughly good one, and now that I have gone so far in
  medical study, I mean to go right through, unless some very unforeseen
  obstacle comes. And then the future may decide what use my knowledge
  may come to. I sometimes think that a woman doctor could find very
  useful work in teaching Anatomy and Physiology,—or at least something
  of them—to women and girls, who are apt to be so terribly ignorant of
  them.

  Lately I have been spending an hour or so of an evening (for rest) in
  hearing a nice ‘daughter of the house’ read French to me, she having
  very few chances of help, poor child.”

On the eve of sailing for England, she sums up the situation in her
diary with her usual relentless truthfulness:

  “April 11th.... Within three weeks of leaving for home,—what balance
  sheet?

  Nearly three years in America.

  In that time complete health regained,—probably better than ever
  before,—real strength and power of study. A profession opening calmly
  and clearly before me,—its sciences already ‘as trees walking,’
  becoming clearer daily. The edge of pain all gone. But with it vivid
  faith and life in many directions—belief in all invisible and much
  reaching after the heroic. A sort of passive ‘quo fata vocant,’—a sort
  of ceasing to demand the very good or very true, perhaps,—a sort of
  coldbloodedness that is not peace,—a nil admirari that only ‘will do
  for it.’ My vocation given up or laid aside, and I quietly learning
  knowledge chiefly because it is power,—hardly yet shaping out any end;
  but what does come, selfish enough. Professor of Anatomy? Surgeon?
  Doctor-Teacher?

  Sometimes a sharp pain rushes across,—‘Ah, if Mother shouldn’t live to
  _see_ me succeed!’—She does seem woven in with the heartstrings,—my
  old darling who _cannot_ forget.

  All this health and new life—more than ever hoped for—comes mediately
  from L.E.S.”

If this estimate of herself is just, one can only say that the lulling
for the time of her higher emotional nature was probably a blessing in
disguise. It helped her to make her foundation of knowledge sure. She
had in her measure to learn—what every true scientist must learn—that
“the natural is the rational and the divine,” that “there is no real
break between the natural and the supernatural.”

                      “A man that looks on glass,
                      On it may stay his eye—”

and if his eye be single his whole body may yet be full of light.

In any case the closing words of S. J.-B.’s ‘balance sheet’ are
significant enough,—

  “Comes—_mediately_—from L.E.S.”!




                              CHAPTER XVI
                               GOING HOME


It was in the course of this summer of 1868 that S. J.-B. realized her
earnest wish to welcome her friend Dr. Lucy Sewall in England. She had
raised great expectations among her friends, but, notwithstanding this,
the visitor’s sweetness and grace won all hearts. “That woman is fit to
be the apostle of a great movement,” Dr. T. W. Jex-Blake had said when
he first saw her photograph, “with a face at once so strong and so
tender.” And a closer acquaintance only served to confirm this judgment.

It is impossible to exaggerate the pride with which S. J.-B. took “the
Doctor” everywhere, in a world that knew not the “sweet girl graduate”
of the present day, and showed her off—for choice in a pretty pale-blue
frock—with secret triumph to the friends who were expecting something
very masculine and aggressive. Quite a number of sick people—Mrs. Unwin
among the number—were eagerly waiting to consult her: and many were the
requests that she would come and settle in England.

What Mr. Jex-Blake thought of her may be gathered from the following
most characteristic note written a month or two later to his daughter:

                                              “13 Sussex Square,
                                                  Brighton.
                                                    2nd August 1868.

  DEAREST,

        It is so much in my head and heart, and in the dear Mother’s, to
  have the privilege of presenting your most valued friend with some
  memento of her visit, that I beg you to use all your influence, and
  entreat Dr. Lucy Sewall to accept a carriage, or any other thing that
  she would value, as a remembrance of your dear Mother and myself, when
  she has returned home. She can little imagine how much she would
  please us both by doing so.

                                 Your affectionate Father,
                                                      T. JEX-BLAKE.”

Two other happenings specially marked the holiday,—a visit from Mrs.
Jenkinson (Mrs. Ballantyne), and a delightful _rapprochement_ between S.
J.-B. and her Father.

Of Mrs. Jenkinson she writes in her diary:

  “So good, so fascinating and dainty! I haven’t had so much wide and
  deep talk with anyone for three years at least....

  The proposal of her driving them to church ending in my doing so.
  Somehow the service moved me greatly. ‘Gethsemane, can I forget,’
  etc....

  ‘What is truth?’—no jesting Pilate,—yet _do_ I stay for an answer? Oh,
  dear, the certainties of p. [181], etc., and now! Yet I think the
  wheel is beginning to sway upwards again. Please God! Yes, surely the
  Ephesians stretched wise earnest hands (or may have done) to the
  Unknown God. ‘Strenuous souls ... to stand in the dark on the lowest
  stair.’”

  “May 31st. Wonderful how content everyone is with my medical
  prospects. Daddy decides our residence (!) for Mount Street, Grosvenor
  Square. I say now pretty definitely,—in 4 more years England, three
  years study, and one of practice.

  Meanwhile a _quiet_ satisfactory holiday _must_ have. No one can tell
  how many more with the old folks, and this _must_ be what will be good
  to remember.”

  “June 20th. Maurice’s lecture. ‘Miss Jex-Blake’s investigations in
  America might help much to the solution of the problem’ [of mixed
  education, presumably]. And after the lecture he _thanked_ me for my
  book. _I_’m cock a hoop now!”

  “June 24th. On the whole my resolve well kept till now,—one month’s
  success in no (or few and light) ‘cataracts and breaks.’ Somehow I
  have a solemn sort of feeling about it this year, as if it would be
  the last with one or other.”

  “Ah, darling,” she writes to her Mother on the voyage, “it was _such_
  hard work to say Goodbye last week! Do you know for one little minute
  I wondered whether after all the price wasn’t _too_ hard to pay, and
  whether after all I shouldn’t give up doctor, hospital, M.D. and all
  and just stay with the old Mother.”

  “Sept. 29th. Boston. I am sorry to say that Harvard has refused me
  again, so I must go to New York!—Ah, well,—‘all things are less
  dreadful than they seem’!”

In that autumn of 1868 the Blackwells carried out their project of
starting a medical school for women in New York.

Two class-tickets are extant admitting Miss S. L. Jex-Blake to the
classes of Practical Anatomy and of the Principles and Practice of
Medicine at the Women’s Medical College of the New York Infirmary; and
there is also a letter from Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell giving advice about
rooms:

  “With regard to your winter’s work, we will discuss it when you come.
  We shall be glad to meet your views in any way we can.

  There are other matters connected with the school itself we shall be
  glad to talk over with you, one in particular, which I think would
  interest you, and in which, from your exceptional position in the
  class, I think you could help us in our organisation; but I shall
  leave its discussion till you come.

  I hope you will allow time to get thoroughly settled and through with
  the trouble of it before November.”

  “Oct. 23rd. Friday. Came to New York.... Went 137 Avenue for a week to
  hunt for rooms,—oh, dear!... At length decided on 222 East Tenth
  [Street]—two back parlours and two above,—gas and all $55. Alice
  arrived on Monday 26th.”

                                             “222 East 10th Street,
                                             New York. Nov. 1st. 68.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        The term begins tomorrow, and I am glad to say that Alice and I
  have just succeeded in getting things into some sort of order in time.
  Besides laying down carpets, buying a stove and kitchen pots and pans,
  a bedstead and chairs, etc., I have been providing winter stores in
  American fashion, and yesterday bought two barrels of potatoes, 30
  lbs. of butter, etc. etc., to say nothing of flour and wine. My money
  is running terribly low,—I have only about £20 left when this month’s
  rent is paid; but then most of my things are bought now, and besides I
  can borrow from Dr. Sewall if needful. Besides the Hospital owes me
  about £10 or £11 for duties paid, so I can probably get on till my
  next quarter comes....

  I know Mother will be thinking of me on my own hook in New York. This
  last week _has_ been a pretty hard time, but now things are falling
  into shape. Alice has been invaluable. I know that having her, with
  the proper food, will just make all the difference to me of being able
  to work on all winter without breaking down. The Blackwells are very
  pleasant, and, though I have no special friends here, I shall be so
  busy and cosy that I expect to get on capitally.

  I am afraid the poor little Doctor gets the worst of it,—she will
  really miss my help in many ways, besides mutual loss of company,—and
  I am sadly afraid she won’t take due care of herself. I can’t tell you
  and Daddy how thankful I am that he has given her that charming little
  carriage,—it is such a relief to my mind to know that she will not be
  forced to drive herself when weary and half frozen: and I believe it
  will make a real difference in her health.

  Her Father was very pleased with it, though I believe he made very
  careful enquiries as to whether the Doctor was sure Daddy ‘could
  afford to give her such a splendid present.’ Of course he didn’t ask
  me that, but I took an opportunity of telling him that I knew you both
  felt that the carriage represented only a small part of your feeling
  of real gratitude to her for all the good she has done me medically
  and otherwise. Wasn’t I right?...”

  “DARLING MOTHER,—I wrote the two other sheets on purpose that you may
  pass them on to Daddy, and I mean to try to do so as much as I can,
  and put anything private on a separate bit for you, for I think the
  dear old man really likes to see my letters, and I am sure I want to
  give him all the pleasure I can.

  His Goodbye was so very kind and loving,—I often think of it.”

                                                          “Nov. 3rd.

  Yesterday was the opening of our College, at which Dr. Elizabeth
  Blackwell made a speech which I was asked to report for the chief
  medical paper here. I have done so, and will send you the paragraph
  when it appears....

  My rooms are not far from the College and other places where I have to
  go daily, and altogether I may consider myself well off. I have
  managed to buy as little furniture as possible, having brought carpets
  from Boston, and having hired two tables, a bed and a stove, from the
  landlady here. I have not yet bought more than £12 worth, and I mean
  to try to get on with as little more as possible.

  I am very glad to hear of Miss Garrett’s good news. I shall send her
  note on to the Doctor. I know it will please her so much.”

                                             “222 East 10th Street.
                                             New York. Nov. 8th. 68.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        I enclose two letters which you can read and forward
  respectively to ‘Mr. H. 69 Jermyn Street, S.W.’ and to ‘Sam. Laurence,
  Esq. 6 Wells Street, W.’ Don’t transpose them!

  I have now got fairly settled in my new abode, and am really very
  comfortable in it,—thanks to Alice. Our rooms are so situated that we
  can keep quite to ourselves,—having even a back staircase almost of
  our own,—and we get on famously. My daily routine is pretty regular
  throughout the week. I go to the dissecting room at 9 a.m. and work
  till about 11.15. At 11.30 comes a lecture on Anatomy and Physiology
  on alternate days,—and I get home to lunch a little before one. Alice
  always has things ready and nice for me, and I rest for about half an
  hour after lunch, before going to the afternoon lectures which begin
  at 2 p.m. and continue (except on Saturday) till 5,—three lectures of
  an hour each. I have just put in a petition to Dr. Emily Blackwell
  (who manages everything and is very nice) for five minutes space
  between each two lectures, for opening windows and a walk up and down
  the corridors,—to which she instantly assented as desirable.

  Pleasant as it was to live with the Doctor, and extremely grateful as
  I feel for the very great good she has done me, I confess now to
  rather enjoying a completely independent nest once more,—for a while
  at least. You see it was inevitable that at Boston everything had to
  be shaped to suit Hospital work, and that was sometimes a nuisance.

  I can study and write and read in a much more thoroughly undisturbed
  way here than I could there,—in fact it would have been simply
  impossible while living there to work as I am doing now,—there were so
  very many inevitable interruptions.

  And yet, but for my two years there, I never could have been strong
  enough for my work here,—I believe that I never was so strong in my
  life before—isn’t that grand?”

                                              “222 East 10th Street,
                                                 Nov. 13th. 1868.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        Yesterday your letter (containing the one from the Times agent)
  was brought to me in the dissecting-room, and wasn’t I pleased to get
  it!... It is quaint sometimes to think of the different scenes in
  which letters are written and read! I am really very much grieved to
  hear of Daddy’s having been so ill,—I did not understand fully before
  how serious his attack had been. I comfort myself, however, with
  hoping that while the news is coming here, he is really getting better
  daily. Give him much love from me and a big kiss on each cheek.... I
  hope my old lady takes care of herself. _Do_ for my sake.

  Darling, I ought sooner to have answered your enquiries about the
  Colleges, etc. Harvard (Boston) is a University for _men_, and we
  couldn’t get in there, because they wouldn’t have any women. I was
  anxious to go there because the degree is considered a valuable one.
  Here in New York the College I am at is just opened by Dr. Elizabeth
  Blackwell for women only,—or at least only women attend it, though I
  believe men would be admitted.

  The teachers are 9 in number,—7 men and 2 women professors, as you
  will see by the circular. In the actual classes we are all women
  students; in going to hospitals, dispensaries, etc., we mix with the
  men. The teaching is really very good and I am getting on capitally.

  Capitally in every way indeed....

  I see it is now a little past nine, and I shall soon be off to bed and
  sleep like a top till about 6 a.m.

  I have never worked so hard in my life (for a continuance), and I have
  never been in such good health. I am absolutely _well_, (and what a
  blessing that is after all these years!) I eat and walk and sleep
  perfectly, have no pains and aches, and the sweetest of tempers!

  I only wish Mother could peep in and see me in my little den!—dog and
  Alice and all.

  With very much love, darling, to Daddy and Carry,

                                         Yours lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

  “Saturday. Nov. 14th. [Diary.] In sober fact I get on grandly. Better
  and stronger than I have ever been.”

  “Monday, Nov. 16th. Oh, why, _why_ didn’t they telegraph at any rate?
  If people only _would_ do _as_ they are asked! Carry’s note just come
  after Chemistry. ‘I believe if you could start from New York today,
  you would have no prospect whatever of seeing him alive’.”

  “Sunday, Nov. 29th. Brighton. Reached home about 10.30 a.m. yesterday
  (after a rush through Dublin, Cork, etc.) to find that he had died ten
  days even before that letter arrived. Nov. 6th. 9.50 a.m.”

It seems a pity for her own sake that S. J.-B. could not have been with
her Father during those last days of his life, for his was certainly one
of the cases in which

         “The soul’s dark cottage, battered and decayed,
         Lets in new light through chinks that Time has made.”

It is no very uncommon experience to see people go through their last
illness without a word of complaint, but Mr. Jex-Blake rose to a higher
level than that. He had felt the end approaching for some months, and
had set his house in perfect order, even to the refinement of writing
farewell letters—beautiful letters they are—to be delivered to those
nearest him after he had left them. There was nothing now to be done
save to gather himself together for the great ordination of death. “I
suppose this is about as bad as can be,” he said to the surgeon who
attended him. “Nothing more can be done, I take it.”

One complaint he did make in the early days of his illness,—that he
“could not collect his thoughts to pray,”—he whose “whole life,” in the
words of his son, “had been a prayer and thanksgiving.” It was a great
joy and comfort to have that son at hand. “I am very happy, very
comfortable,” he said. “You cannot tell how happy I am.... God is so
good to me.”

When the end drew near, he wanted to be lifted out of bed, but they
dared not move him, except as to pillows. About 11.30 Mr. H. [the
surgeon] moved him a little in bed, and he said, “Beautiful, beautiful,”
and never spoke again.

                  *       *       *       *       *

One can imagine the feelings with which his ardent wayward “youngest
little one” arrived in England to hear all this, and to hear it through
the transfiguring medium of bereaved affection. With passionate
intensity she recalls every detail of the parting which had so lingered
in her mind, and which had proved to be the last:

  “He had not risen. I went and lay on the bed by him and kissed him,
  and he told me how they had enjoyed having me,—‘never had so pleasant
  a summer together,’ etc.

  I said I had tried hard and yet I hadn’t fully succeeded. I was sorry
  I had been cross sometimes. ‘No, no,’ he said, stopping me, ‘I hadn’t
  failed,—there was nothing to forgive.’ And then I told him I would try
  and do them credit in my profession, and then he took my hands in his
  and prayed for me. And then I kissed him again and got off the bed,—
  but he (very unlike him) sprang out after me and embraced me again and
  again,—and so we parted very lovingly,—I telling him, I think, that
  ‘next time’ it should be _all_ right. And so, please God, it shall,—if
  there is a God and a ‘next time’!”

In the darkest hour she admitted that it might have been worse: it might
have been her Mother who was taken. One could almost have foretold how
she would act. Cancelling the golden prospects in America with a stroke
of her pen,—cheerfully sacrificing the very considerable financial
outlay,—the class fees, the “snug little nest,” and “two barrels of
potatoes,”—she resolved that never again should the Atlantic divide her
from the life that was most dear.

It was not easy for Dr. Sewall to let her go thus finally, and her first
letters are not a little pathetic, but—born friend of heroes as she was—
she helped to fasten the armour on.

  “If you don’t come back to America,” she said, “you won’t give up the
  work. You will open the profession to women in England.”

And so it came about that Sophia Jex-Blake sought a medical education in
her native land.




                               _PART II_

  It is as hard a thing to maintain a sound understanding, a tender
  conscience, a lively, gracious, heavenly frame of spirit, and an
  upright life, amid contention, as it is to keep your candle lighted in
  the greatest storms.

                                                     RICHARD BAXTER.

  Individuals, feeling strongly, while on the one hand they are
  incidentally faulty in mode or language, are still peculiarly
  _effective_. No great work was done by a system; whereas systems rise
  out of individual exertions. Luther was an individual. The very faults
  of an individual excite attention; he loses, but his cause (if good,
  and he powerful-minded) gains. This is the way of things; we promote
  truth by a self-sacrifice.

                                                  JOHN HENRY NEWMAN.




                               CHAPTER I
                                DRIFTING


S.J.-B. landed at Queenstown on November 27th, 1868, and “came rushing
through Cork, Dublin and Holyhead on that weary 24 hours’ journey” back
to the home in Brighton, to find that she had arrived too late. Her
Father had died some three weeks before, and outwardly the household had
already settled down to the old life—as households do—in a way that to
her ardent nature must at first have seemed passing strange. There was
the joy and pain of meeting her Mother again,—the joy and pain of
finding that that Mother was too fine a Christian to be broken-hearted
at the prospect of so brief a parting,—and then, little by little, there
came for S.J.-B. the realization of all she had left behind.

On board the _Java_ she had written to Dr. Sewall:

  “The first thing of all I want to do is to write and tell you what I
  said so very imperfectly in my hurry and worry when you left,—how much
  your kind thought for me in arranging even the little things of my
  cabin has touched me.... Even now when I am going home—and going under
  such circumstances—the thought of all you have done for me and of all
  I owe you, comes uppermost....

  Mrs. Browning says,—

                  ‘God gives what he gives—be content,
                    He resumes nothing given, be sure,’

  and your love and help have been given to me, and I _know_ it is not
  all over now....

  I am going home now to try and be a child once more,—simply to love
  and serve my Mother, as God will help me (for I do believe in Him in
  my pain and my love in my heart of hearts) and I believe that by being
  a child I shall learn to grow a better woman.”

Such was her resolve, and for months she struggled hard to carry it out,
with no small success when one considers the complexity of the elements
involved. She had come from a busy bustling beneficent life, with an
outlook that appealed keenly to her energetic and ambitious nature, and
she found herself in the quiet, smoothly-ordered home of her childhood,
where she was only “Miss Sophy,” where her medical books and microscope
slides were roughly classified as “nasty,” and where she was expected to
conform to a rule of life which had never given scope to her
possibilities, and was little likely to do so now that all its music was
set in a minor key. The free life in America had developed her
capabilities; quite possibly it had also rubbed off some few of those
superficial elegancies that were regarded as a primary essential in the
Englishwoman of her class.

There was another side to the question too. Glad as Mrs. Jex-Blake
always was to see her “youngest little one” again, one can imagine that
in the circumstances so electrical a presence in the house was not an
unmixed boon. “I had much rather _know_ you well and happy there [in
Boston] than see you ill and know you worried here,” the Mother had
written years before, and there is no reason to think that her feeling
in the matter had changed. Nothing could alter the deep undercurrent of
love and understanding between this Mother and child, but neither of
them had a naturally equable temperament, and one gathers that on the
surface things were not always smooth.

  “Poor little woman,” S.J.-B. writes to Dr. Sewall, on receipt of the
  first letter from Boston, “I do feel so sorry for you all alone and
  dreary, but don’t you think I am even worse off than you are? You can
  fancy what this house is now,—so silent and mourning,—and so much cut
  off even from outside, and at any rate no people or work or occupation
  of any interest outside ourselves.

  M. and C. have their regular ways and plans, I suppose, but it is so
  long since I have been at home except for a visit, that it’s hard for
  me to fit in anywhere, and of course everybody’s feeling more or less
  sad and pained doesn’t make matters smoother. Just at present I am
  getting my books and drawers, etc., to rights, and after that is done
  I mean to try and read some Medicine at least,—perhaps if we stay here
  all winter I may apply to visit at the Hospital, etc.—only it would be
  rather disagreeable all alone.

  Oh, Lucy dear, I do think it’s too bad to be expected to go on with
  Medicine, and not have you to help and interest me in it. If I didn’t
  believe you would after all come and start me in practice when I do
  get through, I don’t think I should have any heart to go on at all.
  But we _will_ be together again some day, old lady, won’t we? Oh,
  dear, I am getting so tired of living and fighting and hoping! As soon
  as one hopes one has got a little foothold it is all knocked away from
  under one!”

The letter then plunges into the question of money and accounts, which
were not Dr. Sewall’s strong point.

  “Poor little girl!—she has so many accounts, and I am dreadfully
  afraid she will get into a dreadful mess with them all! Do tell me if
  you got your accounts anything like straight after New York.”

Dr. Sewall was overwhelmed with work, but her letters came as fast and
frequently as mails could bring them. “I do hope you do not miss me as
much as I miss you,” she wrote, and again:

  “I do hope this New Year that begins so sadly may not be a very hard
  one for you, though I fear you will have to fight hard before you can
  settle down at home. Do try to get some visiting at the Hospital or
  some medical work as soon as you can. It will do you good and your
  Mother too.”

But she too, when it comes to a question of “business,” relapses
delightfully into the child. “Do say you are contented with me, and that
I have done well.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

For three weeks S.J.-B. drifted, uncertain of her course, and then she
set her sail.

  “Today—after three weeks of doubt, indecision and rather negation—I
  was suddenly inspired to get up out of the dining-room arm-chair, walk
  to the Hospital, and ask Mr. Salzmann to read Medicine with me,—so
  Thursday and seq.—Histology!

  It’s quite odd how pleased I am at the prospect of ‘shop’!”

On the last night of the year, as was her wont, she made her summing-up:

  “Within a few hours of eight years ago,—the window,—and

                       ‘May the New Year cherish—’

  I don’t think there are any ‘hopes that now are bright.’ I believe I
  have been growing downwards in some ways. The simply quiet and
  comfortable, with no bother of any kind, seems to be about my ideal
  now.”

And this on the eve of the ‘Edinburgh Fight’!

The truth is S. J.-B. was in one of those backwaters of life which may
at any moment give place to the swift rush of the current. She was
living a great deal, of course, in the life she had left behind. On
January 4th she writes to Dr. Sewall:

  “When I find time I mean to write to your cousin.... I am sorry for
  W., he is a very nice boy. But, dear me, they do seem such a pair of
  children.

  I don’t think she will get a _nicer_ man, but of course that is
  nothing if she doesn’t love him. I quite agree with you, ‘Never marry
  if you can help it’!”

And, in the depths of her mind she was constantly pondering the problems
and mysteries of our being.

  “Jan. 21st. [Diary] 29!—‘et praeterea nihil’!”

  “Jan. 25th.... Yesterday Martineau’s fine definition of atheism,—the
  mind that venerates nothing, aspires to nothing.”

  “Jan. 31st. Came tonight across old Trench’s line,—‘When God afflicts
  thee think He hews a rugged stone, which must be shaped or else aside
  as useless thrown.’

  And then those true sad pale lines of Martineau’s (‘Child’s Thought’)
  about youth’s eagerness for truth, sometimes productive of dark
  agonies of doubt and loneliness drearier than death,—leaving the soul
  exposed upon the field of conflict without a God to strive for or a
  weapon for the fight.

  Yesterday his ‘Immortality’ helped me again to seize that idea,—
  apprehend, ‘hang on to’ (Trench). That the negative testimony was
  stronger for than against—far harder to realize soul extinct than
  immortal,—that instinct for immortality grows stronger in sorrow,
  bereavements and on confines of death,—more likely teachers than the
  dust and glare of Vanity Fair. That the strange ‘caprice of death’ in
  selection, etc., inexplicable except in belief of future to which this
  is the ante-chamber. ‘Simply migrations of mind.’”

Of course the outward stagnation of life, the want of a definite object
and purpose, renewed the old regrets for the friendship by means of
which “we might have done anything together, we two.”

  “Feb. 3rd. 4 p.m.

                       ‘Are not the letters coming?
                       The sun has almost set.’

  I seem to have two such abiding ideas (presentiments?—hopes?) 1st.
  That somehow, somewhen the old door must be reopened,—light in the
  eventide,... 2nd. That some medical way will open—perhaps in
  Scotland,—and at length some one take pity on me and really teach me
  and push me.

  Oh, dear, how I wish I had anyone with whom I could really take
  counsel and make common cause.

  Well, I believe I am learning silence and patience at least somewhat,
  but how ‘bleak and bare’! Everything so grey and so dim.

  Feb. 4th. In the night I woke and found M.’s head was ‘dreadful.’ So I
  laid one hand on her forehead and one on her hand and willed and
  willed the pain away,—till she slept quietly.

  Curious how weary and achy that arm was even next morning,—how ‘washed
  out’ I was!

  She says,—‘How do you explain it?’

  ‘Nohow.’”




                               CHAPTER II
                      AT THE GATES OF THE CITADEL


In any case S. J.-B. was not to wait long for those “with whom she could
take counsel.” In the autumn of 1867 Mr. Alexander Macmillan appears to
have discussed with her the projected publication of a volume of essays
on questions relating to modern women, and in January 1869 he writes in
answer to an enquiry from her:

  “DEAR MADAM,

        Mrs. Butler, 280 South Hill Park Road, Liverpool, is the
  address. There has been nothing done about the proposed volume yet.
  But I have by no means abandoned the hope of having it done, and shall
  not be sorry if you allude to it in writing to Mrs. Butler.

  My own notion was that the volume should be wholly written by ladies,
  and that some diversity of judgement should be allowed on minor points
  at least, provided that a consensus were assured on the large ground
  of higher culture for women. I confess myself that the question of the
  Suffrage is a doubtful one.... I confess myself to think that politics
  in the sense of mere government is by no means of the highest
  importance to nations and to humanity, and that what is done in homes
  is incalculably deeper and more powerful [in its influence] on human
  character and destiny.

  All these points are open to discussion, and I think a volume claiming
  the very highest and widest culture for women might at the same time
  discuss with advantage whether the field in which it is to be
  exercised need be co-ordinate with men’s.

                                       Yours very truly,
                                                   ALEX. MACMILLAN.”

Apparently S. J.-B. approached Mrs. Butler without delay, and a few
weeks later she writes to Dr. Sewall from Bonchurch, where they were
staying for the benefit of Mrs. Jex-Blake’s health:

  “Did I tell you that I have been making friends with Mrs. Butler, the
  head of the non-Davies party among the women? She approves of the new
  Cambridge exams, which Miss Davies ... refuses because not identical
  with those of the men. Mrs. Butler and I say ‘Take all you can get and
  then ask for more,’ don’t you?

  I expect to be here with my Mother for about three weeks longer, then
  she will probably go to Cheltenham to see my brother, and I may go to
  Cambridge, Edinburgh, St. Andrews, etc., to see if I can poke in
  anywhere.

  And yet, even if I got admitted, I don’t feel sure that I should feel
  ready to leave my Mother next winter. Unless she changes very much for
  the better, I cannot but think very badly of her. I think she has aged
  five years since you saw her....

  She said to me yesterday, ‘Don’t you wish Dr. Lucy were here?’ I said,
  ‘No, she’s doing better work,’ but I _do_ sometimes ‘weary for you’
  all the same.”

Mrs. Butler was deeply interested in the new ally, and very anxious that
she should carry out her dream of obtaining a proper medical education
in her own country. Dr. T. W. Jex-Blake was also sympathetic, and so it
came about that enquiries were made among University professors who
might be supposed to have an open mind on the subject. Some interesting
letters were the result:

                                                     “Wimborne,
                                                          Jan. 14th.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have not been able to obtain quite as accurate information
  about London University as I should like, but there is no use in my
  delaying any longer to answer your letter. As regards Cambridge, I do
  not think that the most sanguine reformer would advise you to look for
  any relaxation of barriers that would be of service to you, for some
  years. I am among the most sanguine, and I do not think that we shall
  be giving degrees to women until after ten years at least. We do not
  as yet examine men unless resident in colleges. The University of
  London, which is an open examining board, ought to be much more
  hopeful. Unfortunately this university (by an arrangement which ought
  not to have been borrowed from its older sisters) is governed in the
  last resort by Convocation, an assembly got together by agitation
  among all graduates of a certain standard, and in which the influence
  of the London doctors is practically preponderant. This assembly
  rejected last year a proposal by which women would have been admitted
  to medical degrees.

  The proposal will, I believe, be renewed, but I cannot say what reason
  there is to anticipate a different result. My information is only at
  second hand, and you may easily get more accurate in London. As soon
  as I hear more precisely what is going to be done, I will let you
  know. I cannot, from what I have heard advise you to expect a very
  speedy change.

  At the same time there is a general movement, of which it is hard to
  estimate the force, against the exclusion of women from the higher
  education. You say that you do not wish your plans to be talked of. I
  am rather sorry, for if you would suffer yourself to be made a
  grievance, it might help ‘the cause’ in London.

                                 Believe me,
                                         Yours very truly,
                                                    HENRY SIDGWICK.”

                                             “Trin. Coll. Cambridge.
                                                    Feb. 4th.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have now been here nearly a week, and hoped to write to you
  before, but I wished before doing so to see Markby, Bonney, and one or
  two of the Medical Board, and, being overwhelmed with work, have only
  just managed to do so. I find that neither Markby nor Bonney estimate
  any higher than I do the chance of your request being granted.
  Professor Liveing, one of the members of the Board, is favourable, but
  shakes his head as to his colleagues. Doctors preponderate on it, and
  one, Dr. Humphrey, professor of Anatomy, whom I expected to find
  somewhat more liberal, is averse to women practising medicine, ‘mainly
  on their own account, because’—but you are familiar with the reasons.

  I have not canvassed the others as you had a certain wish for secrecy.
  If you think it worth while, I will ask Liveing to broach the question
  at the Board, without mentioning your name, in order to sound opinion:
  or I will in other ways ascertain privately the views of the members.
  I do not however feel that this would be decisive, as they may not
  have considered the question and might yield to argument. However I
  feel almost sure that your appeal would be rejected without much
  discussion. _Markby_ is of opinion that even supposing the Board
  consented to propose the change to the Senate, that body would
  certainly reject it. And he (M.) is inclined to think that it would
  injure the cause of female education here in general, to stir up
  hostility in the Senate on this particular matter. (I do not myself
  feel sure of this.) But he does not think application to the Board
  would do any harm. Bonney also thinks this course hopeless but
  harmless.

  Even after consent of the Board and the Senate, you would have to be
  admitted as member of some college; but in the case supposed, that
  would not cause much difficulty....

  I do not know whether you will think any thing more of us after this.
  If you do come to look for yourself at the ‘terrain,’ you will at any
  rate find a minority of sympathizers who will give you any aid in
  their power, among them

                                       Yours sincerely,
                                                     HENRY SIDGWICK.

  P.S. You will see that, on reflection, I am somewhat doubtful of the
  advantage of making the application. On the whole, however, I still
  think it would be a good thing.”

Meanwhile Professor Masson of Edinburgh University had written a letter
to Mrs. Butler, from which S. J.-B. quotes the following extract in her
diary:

  “It will give me much pleasure to see Miss Jex-Blake (whose name is
  well known to me); Sir James Simpson will be very glad to see her
  also.... I fear however that at present the chance of the throwing
  open of professional education and degrees are not so great with us as
  Miss Blake seems to imagine” (!)—The exclamation point is S. J.-B.’s.—
  “But who knows what may happen or how soon?”

On February 15th, S. J.-B. writes to Dr. Sewall:

  “I think I may probably go to Cambridge and see whether there is the
  least chance of anything medical there. I have almost no hope, but it
  is thought well to apply at least to the Medical Board just for the
  principle of the thing. Then I may probably go to Edinburgh, St.
  Andrews, Glasgow, etc. I understand that Glasgow was expressly founded
  on the model of Bologna;—now Bologna admitted women!

  Did I tell you that there is to be a volume of Essays published in the
  summer about all sorts of Women’s questions, and I have been asked to
  write about the Medical question. If I do, I rather think I shall send
  you my essay to criticise first, shall I?... I wish very much that I
  could find some English lady to go in for Medicine with me,—it would
  be such a comfort in thundering at the Colleges, and in working
  afterwards. There is one very capable woman of about 30,—a _thorough_
  lady,—who is staying with us now, who would like extremely to study
  for many reasons, but is withheld by the great prejudice and very bad
  health of her mother.”

It was indeed a loss to the whole woman movement that Miss Ursula Du Pre
was prevented from taking a more articulate part in it, for one tries in
vain to think of one of her contemporaries who was more generously
gifted by nature and circumstances. She had mental powers that would
have fitted her to shine in almost any of the professions strictly
preserved for the benefit of men, great common sense, a finely balanced
judgment, and—what appealed to S. J.-B. perhaps more than anything else—
a keen and unfailing sense of humour. Tact too she had, and the singular
charm of the “great lady” who is at the same time one of the simple-
hearted. Deeply religious throughout life, she was absolutely devoid of
false humility and of the ultra-sensitiveness that would have rendered
her gifts of small avail beyond her own circle. The accident of her sex
set her free from the cares and responsibilities of the landowner; and
one cannot wonder that S. J.-B. bitterly resented the unalterable
decision of some members of her family that a medical career was out of
the question.

Nothing, however, can really rob the world of the usufruct of gifts like
these. The influence of a man or woman can never be measured by the
number of those who experience it at first hand. Who shall say whether
it is better to have a thousand disciples, or twelve, or one?

Mrs. Jex-Blake and Mrs. Du Pre had long been acquainted, but it was in
this month of January 1869 that the two daughters first met and found
each other. S. J.-B. brought much to the friendship, as the reader of
the previous volume is aware; her gifts were great, her knowledge of
life astonishingly wide for a young woman of her day; but she found no
less than she brought. Never again could she complain of the lack of a
friend “with whom she could take counsel.” All through the troublous
times that were to follow so closely on the inception of their
friendship, Miss Du Pre was her admiring critic, her confidante and
counsellor, following every move in the complicated game, disapproving,
perhaps, sometimes, but sympathising always. She was the friend too of
S. J.-B.’s friends and comrades, and in the long days of hope deferred
there were those who must surely have fallen in the breach but for Miss
Du Pre’s material and spiritual aid.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile S. J.-B. wrote the Essay on “Medicine as a Profession for
Women,” which was published a few months later in the volume entitled
_Women’s Work and Women’s Culture_. “Fairish, not quite satisfactory,”
is her own verdict on the first draft, which was doubtless considerably
improved by the suggestions of friendly critics. As the Essay appeared
later in her book on _Medical Women_, it could scarcely be bettered, and
indeed it has proved a storehouse of research and argument for all
subsequent writers and speakers on the subject.

Professor Newman, to whom Mrs. Butler sent the first draft, wrote an
admirable letter:

  “I have no learning in the history of female physicians, but I know
  that in my boyhood I read in a magazine an urgent remonstrance with
  ladies for their prejudice against man-midwives, of whom the writer
  speaks as a beneficent innovation. I think I have read that they were
  first used in the Court circle of Louis XIV.... To prove negatives is
  always hard, but I should not fear to write that the exclusion of
  women from acting as physicians to women is quite a modern usurpation
  by the male sex, and limited to the nations which cultivate modern
  science. The topic reminds me of the address of the nurse to Queen
  Phoedra in Euripides’ Hippolytus, when she observes her mistress to be
  wild and out of health,—‘If thy complaint be anything of a more secret
  kind, _here are women_ at hand to compose the disease. But, if thy
  distress be such as may be told to males, tell it in order that it may
  be communicated to the physicians.’

  This is almost as if _in no case_ would the male physician do more
  than give advice when the facts were reported to him through the
  women.

  It is nearly so in Turkey to this day. A Pasha wanted advice for his
  wife from a friend of mine without his seeing her.”

  “_Do_ quote Euripides in your Essay,” writes Mrs. Butler. “Never mind
  if we look a little more learned than we are. Let us spoil the
  Egyptians.”

And again,—

  “I am sure Mr. Newman _intended_ you to use anything in his letter
  which you could make available. He is so generously helpful.”

On February 24th, S. J.-B. writes to Dr. Sewall:

  “I have written the Essay I spoke of about Medical Women, and I shall
  send it to you to see in a week or two, as soon as I can get it
  copied. There are several points on which I want your authority and
  opinion;—tell me whenever you think I overstate facts or make
  mistakes—or tell me if you think I might put things _more_ strongly
  with advantage. Tell me how many instances have occurred of men
  doctors putting their womankind under _your_ treatment, or that of
  other women you know,—Dr. B., Dr. C., and J. W.?—any more?

  Also anything else that occurs to you generally.

  I had a witty letter from Miss Putnam this morning, in which she says
  how very indifferent it is to her if Mrs. D. chooses to ‘invent
  Arabian Nights’ tales’ about her. I do hope that you have published
  her letter,—don’t simply disregard me because I’m across the Atlantic
  and can’t pinch you! She made me dreadfully envious by saying that she
  is going in for some months’ work at Operative Surgery, and that it
  will be ‘very jolly.’ I believe, however that for the summer at any
  rate I _ought_ to stay with my Mother and try to make her very jolly
  (poor old darling!) If I can get into any of the Colleges for the
  winter, that may be another matter, though I am not sure.”

Meanwhile Professor Sidgwick was pursuing his kind and public-spirited
enquiries:

                                                   “Trin. Coll. Cam.
                                                        Mar. 1.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I should have written to you before, but I have found it
  difficult to make up my mind. I now, however, after some hesitation,
  am inclined to dissuade you from making the attempt. I have not
  visited any of the Medical Board (as I thought it best, if you did
  come, that you should find them unprepared), but I have discussed the
  matter with about ten discreet persons varying in age and position.

  Not one of us thinks that there is the smallest chance of your request
  being granted. The feeling of the [? Board] is certain to be decidedly
  against you: and there are minor obstacles interposed by existing
  regulations, which might be easily set aside if there was a desire to
  do so, but which will furnish excuses for rejection to any who may
  require such.

  The question then comes, Will the raising of the matter _now_ advance
  or retard our _ultimate_ success? On this point we vary in opinion,
  but no one very decidedly thinks it will be a gain, while some are
  very strongly of opinion that it will do more harm than good. After
  much hesitation, I have come myself to this latter view, not on
  general grounds, for in general I like (as Lincoln said) to keep
  pegging away: but because we have hitherto done what we have done for
  women’s education by great quietness and moderation, and so far it
  seems best to go on in the same way: if our present scheme for
  examining women succeeds, it will be easier to take a further step:
  moreover I expect that we shall soon open our examinations more
  unrestrictedly to men, and that will make it easier to open them to
  women. Your application _now_ would thus be a ‘breach of continuity,’
  and would appear extravagant to many undecided people who after a few
  years may be brought to look upon a similar application as quite
  natural.

  Against this is to be set the advantage of raising the question, and
  getting people to exercise their minds on it, especially with so good
  a case (and I have no doubt advocacy) as yours.

  In short, we should gain, I believe, by argument, but should very
  likely lose more by hardening a mass of fluid prejudice, that may
  otherwise evaporate in the natural course of events.

  So that, on the whole, I am slightly[47] opposed to your making the
  attempt, on public grounds only: and even if the balance between
  probable gain and loss is about even, I should hardly like to advise
  you to incur so much trouble that could not possibly benefit yourself.

  If you do come, I need not say that I will do anything I can to assist
  you, and generally to make your stay in Cambridge as pleasant as
  possible.

  My _instinct_ is to tell you to come, but that is because I like a
  fight: my soberer judgment is the other way.

                                Believe me,
                                        Yours very truly,
                                                    HENRY SIDGWICK.”

Footnote 47:

  “Slightly” is interpolated in the original letter.

                                                        “Trin. Coll.
                                                           Mar. 8.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I am sorry that we shall not have the pleasure of seeing you:
  but, as regards the application, I am quite convinced that your
  decision is right. Just at present the reformers here do not want
  stimulating, and I think the neutral people want management. As
  regards the Scotch Universities, I am afraid I cannot help you
  personally....

  I have taken counsel with a friend here—J. Stuart—who is now examiner
  at St. Andrews. He has promised to write to you and to send
  introductions to two or three people there whom you may like to visit.
  I imagine that either Edinburgh or St. Andrews will be more likely to
  serve your purpose than Glasgow or Aberdeen. If I can find any means
  of aiding you at Edinburgh, I will write again. I may have friends who
  know some of the Professors. Masson is the only one of whom I know
  anything,—he having once been an editor of mine. I should think he is
  very likely to help you, Shairp, I should fear, not; but I may be
  wrong.

  Of Ireland I know nothing: but from what I have heard I should think
  our Conservatism here is nothing to the Conservatism of Dublin—
  particularly when Gladstone is Disestablishing.

  With best wishes for your success, I am,

                                  Yours very sincerely,
                                                       H. SIDGWICK.”

On the following day came a letter from Mr. Stuart, offering all the
help in his power:

  “I hope you will excuse my unceremoniousness in thus writing to you by
  the belief that I have your success much at heart.”

  “My husband and I both think that it would be better not to try
  Cambridge in the face of Mr. Sidgwick’s opinion,” writes Mrs. Butler.
  “No one is better able to test the feeling of the University than he.
  I hope before long England will be ashamed of herself in this matter.
  We must do all we can by working quietly and extensively on the hearts
  and consciences of men. I find no man of ordinary candour who is not
  easily convinced, but the M.D.s will be the obstacle. They hang
  together so.

  Shall you try Edinburgh? If not, do you think of taking a foreign
  degree? I wish you were an M.D. You would have plenty of patients at
  once.—myself among the number.”

Thus it came about that when Mrs. Jex-Blake went to visit her son at
Cheltenham, S.J.-B. “screwed her courage to the sticking-point,” and
went to Edinburgh. The entry in her diary is characteristic:

  “Monday, March 15th. To Edinbro. How I dreaded the journey and
  sequence! On waking,—‘If Thou go not with me, carry me not up hence’!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile the University of Edinburgh stood foursquare, and the
professors sat in their comfortable chairs, little dreaming that their
Day of Judgment was at hand. Even at a cursory glance they were an
imposing body of men. Some few of them were great in character, or in
intellect, or in both: taken as a whole they were probably well above
the average. In any case they were men of like passions with ourselves,
well-disposed, kindly, just a little blunted by success, desirous of
smooth things. As they acted, so would most similarly constituted bodies
of men have acted at that day. The only difference between them and
other men lay in the fact that it was to them the challenge of the
future came.

And who was to tell them that this was the challenge of the future? It
was so trifling an episode in outward seeming,—only the visit of a
gifted young woman, with a clear strong head, but assuredly with no
immunity from an average human being’s liability to error and mistake.
If the professors had been canvassed on the subject of her request
beforehand the result would have been an almost unanimous No: they had
no more idea of admitting women to the University than they had of
founding a Chair of Millinery. But the applicant was among them before
they were aware; she knew what she wanted and she knew how to state her
wants effectively. Her arguments were all at her finger-ends; and,
although she made no sex appeal, she was possessed of fine dark eyes and
a singularly musical voice.

In those days men had not learnt to be on their guard against an
apparently guileless young woman. To many she stood for little more than
a precocious child, who must be humoured, and, if necessary silenced
later by sheer _force majeure_.

But S. J.-B. took them a step farther on than this. She was obviously no
mere child: she was a woman who had seen a good deal of life, who
realized something of the meaning of sex as a factor in human affairs,
and who was prepared calmly to assert that it ought not to stand in the
way of the privilege she asked. When she faced the pundits with those
candid earnest eyes, there must have been some who were literally
mesmerised for the moment into sharing her belief.

Yes, the Day of Judgment was at hand. I do not mean, of course, that the
“sheep” were those who forwarded the applicant’s claims, and the “goats”
those who put difficulties in her way. In those days there might well be
room for two opinions on an experiment that had scarcely been tried. The
Day of Judgment is apt to be a subtler, more searching thing than that.
What I mean is that one cannot go through the vast mass of letters and
documents relating to the whole matter without seeing the stuff of which
those men were made,—the “worth” on the one hand, the “leather and
prunella” on the other,—and oh, such imposing leather and prunella! One
realizes afresh that when a big emergency takes everyone by surprise,
only those who are guided in life by great principles can hope to act
rightly. They may not all act alike: they may or may not make mistakes;
but at least they act with essential dignity: they ring true; when they
lie in their graves their greatness shines out from the musty old papers
which have chanced for a few short years to embody an imperishable
record.

And there is no one whose greatness shines out more clearly than does
that of David Masson, Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature, to
whom S. J.-B. went first. From first to last one’s admiration for him
never swerves: one does not know which to admire in him most, the clear
insight, the high courage, the fine discretion, or the sheer unfailing
brotherly sympathy.

This is the first impression he made upon S. J.-B.:

  “Quiet, rather reserved, kindly. Promised introduction to most of
  professors. Seems rather hopeful,—‘tide setting in.’”

One wonders what were the words in which he summed her up. He must have
rejoiced in the clear brain, the quick wit, the cultured voice, the easy
flow of sane and logical speech. Did he guess at the impulsive nature
that was bound to make mistakes?—at the great warm heart that was bound
to suffer more than most?

In any case he gave her the following letter to the Dean of the Faculty
of Medicine:

  “MY DEAR BALFOUR,

        Miss Jex-Blake, an English lady known as the author of a work on
  American Schools, is now in Edinburgh for a few days, chiefly with a
  view to ascertaining what chance there may be that Edinburgh
  University may (now that Paris and other continental cities have set
  the example) see its way to conferring a medical degree, after due
  study and qualification, on a lady candidate. It is but right that
  having come to Edinburgh for this purpose she should see you as the
  Dean of the Medical Faculty, in order to receive the best information
  and advice on the subject: and I shall be obliged by your courtesy in
  this matter.

                                      Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

There was a similar note to Dr. Christison, in which the writer said:

  “The question, I believe, has been already before you; but it has
  seemed to Miss Blake possible that, now that Paris and other
  Universities abroad have set the example, there may be some chance of
  a modification of the previous conclusion of Edinburgh University on
  the subject. As she will receive the best information and advice on
  the whole subject from members of the Medical Faculty, I take the
  liberty of giving her this note to you, with a request that you will
  kindly explain to her the state of things as they are, and of
  possibilities in the direction she has in view.

                                      Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

And so, quite alone—she who was as dependent on a comrade, on a
“helpmeet,” as some of our greatest men have been—with strange lodgings
for a “base,”—she began the great work of canvassing the Edinburgh
professors and the distinguished citizens who, for one reason or
another, might be supposed to have a voice in the matter. She stood
absolutely alone. She might belong to a good old family: her brother
might be Headmaster of an English public school: but on the other side
of the Tweed only a few of the enlightened knew anything of that. She
was merely a clever young woman, with a rather outlandish name, who had
conceived the extraordinary desire of obtaining a medical education by
hook or by crook under the auspices of the Edinburgh University. If only
Dr. Sewall could have been with her—or Mrs. Jenkinson, or Miss Du Pre,—
what a stay she would have been! Fortunately Mr. Begbie was “kind and
helpful as ever”; the old friendship with Miss Orr and with Mrs. Burn
Murdoch was a great resource still; and Mr. Burn Murdoch was ready and
willing to help to the utmost of his power. Miss Orr, it is true, was
rather uncertain about the whole quest, wanted to know whether her old
friend “went to church and read the Bible”; and, however relevant the
question may have been,—S. J.-B. rightly felt that there was no time to
go into it at this stage.

Undoubtedly her two great supports through the time of stress—if we set
aside for the moment all that was involved in her “_If Thou go not with
me,—!_” were the deep interest taken by Miss Du Pre in every detail of
the story; and the possession of Sadie’s poems, which had just been
published. In these latter she found fitting expression for the
fightings and fears of her own inner life, and for her hard-won
“twilight” consolation. It is an interesting fact that these two
elements should have come into her life just at this moment, for one
scarcely sees how she could have “won through” without them. Sadie’s
poems remained dear to her throughout life: she knew many of them by
heart and repeated them almost on her deathbed; and her copy is worn
even more “threadbare” than are her volumes of Robertson’s Sermons. One
can imagine the feelings with which, after a keen exciting day’s work,
she went home to her lonely lodgings, with no “Alice” looking out for
her, to write her report to Dr. Sewall or Miss Du Pre, and to copy in
her diary—as she did—the lines:

         “Up the way that is narrow, the path that is steep,
           With no guide for my footsteps, no help for my fear:
         Only this—that He knoweth the way that I tread,
         And His banner of crimson is over my head.

         With the loneliness awful pressed into my soul,
           With no voice for companion, no grasp of a hand—”

Yes, one cannot help wishing that an intimate friend had been at hand.
One wonders whether she was even becomingly dressed: we know she would
have wished to be; but she so seldom made the most of her
appearance.[48]

Footnote 48:

  “By the way your accounts of your dress are just a shade
  contradictory,” writes Miss Du Pre somewhat later. “One day you tell
  me you look disreputable and plunge me into depths of anxiety! and the
  next you say you are ‘very tidy.’ Isn’t this more than average
  inconsistency?”

In any case what happened is perfectly clear. The Professors for the
most part had a deeply rooted dislike to having women students in the
University: in fact, the idea of such a thing was unthinkable; but when
a gifted young woman actually sat in their sanctums urging her plea,
they could not bear to say No. Strictly speaking, they should have
refused to see her, but did any man yet ever refuse to see a woman whose
name was before the public?

One wonders as one reads the papers how many of them knew what their
“powers,”—what the legal powers of the University—really were?—how many
of them really wished to know? There was a comfortable conviction in the
back of their minds that insuperable difficulties lay shrouded in those
unprobed depths. In the meantime why not show a little kindness to a
gallant girl who was as modest as anyone could be in formulating so
outrageous a demand, and whose pleading—so it has been said—would have
“wiled the bird from the bough”? It was after she was gone that the real
horror of the situation came home to them, and that they fell back again
with relief on the thought of those unprobed depths,—the legal powers of
the University.

It would all be very ordinary, and sometimes rather depressing, reading,
were it not that Professor Masson and some of the others, when they gave
her their provisional support, really meant exactly what they would have
meant in giving their support to a man—no more and no less. Their own
principle, their own righteousness was involved; they were quite
prepared to see women students—if so it was to be—in the University
quadrangle and class-rooms; and they meant to do what in them lay to
give this woman a fighting chance.




                              CHAPTER III
                                SUCCESS?


Meanwhile Miss Elizabeth Garrett was providing in her own career the
very example that was needed to clinch the argument. After much arduous
work and lavish expenditure of money on special classes, she had
obtained the “L.S.A.,” a licence to practise from the Society of
Apothecaries,[49] and good use she had made of the platform thus gained.
Henceforth no one could deny that an Englishwoman had the physique and
the wit to study, “qualify,” and practise Medicine,—yes, even to get her
full share of patients. It was scarcely to be expected that Miss Garrett
would rest content without a University degree, but she considered that
the time was not ripe for the agitation of the question in England, and
she had little sympathy with S. J.-B.’s efforts in Edinburgh. None the
less her successful career was a more valuable argument than her support
would have been,—even if, at the moment, she had not been too fully
occupied elsewhere to enter into the question at all.

Footnote 49:

  After Miss Garrett had obtained her diploma, the Society of
  Apothecaries passed a resolution forbidding students henceforth to
  receive any part of their education privately, thus making it
  impossible even for a woman of means to follow in her steps.

On March 21st, S. J.-B. wrote to Dr. Sewall:

  “I have two nice little bits of news about Miss Garrett. One is that
  the Princess Louise went to see her, and, after enquiring about the
  medical prospects of women, expressed strong hopes of their complete
  success. This is really worth a great deal, and I hope you will have
  too much sense to sneer at it.

  Secondly, I see in the _British Medical Journal_ (which I shall try to
  send you) a notice that Miss Garrett had ‘by special order of the
  minister’ been admitted to the first examination for M.D. [in Paris]
  and had passed it in the presence of a crowded audience with very
  great _éclat_. That woman certainly has great power of study and work,
  hasn’t she?

  By the bye, you would have been interested at the scene in which I
  noticed this paragraph. I was sitting yesterday morning at Sir James
  Simpson’s breakfast table, between him and his wife, and he passed the
  paper to me....

  He was, of course, quite favourable to my application, and I am to
  breakfast with him again tomorrow and hear what he will do about
  it.[50] He is going off to Rome for a trip this week, but I am very
  anxious that he should vote in my favour first. He is so unreliable
  that I do not know how to make sure of his doing it though,—very
  likely he’ll be at the other end of Edinburgh when the meeting is
  held. I told him that you remembered him and always spoke of his
  kindness to you. I am not quite sure whether he recalled it. He spoke
  highly of Dr. Emily Blackwell.”

Footnote 50:

  To the irreparable loss of the women students, Sir James Simpson died
  in the spring of the following year.

A few days previous to this an unobtrusive little note of no small
import appears in the diary:

  “8.30 p.m. at Begbie’s met Campbell Smith, who walked home with me.
  Older and more quiet than I had expected. Kindly.”

The favourable impression was mutual, if one may judge from the letter
that follows:

                                             “30 Royal Circus,
                                                   21st March, 1869.

  DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        I left your MS. yesterday with Mr. Findlay of the _Scotsman_. I
  think he will give you some help. If nothing be in the _Scotsman_
  tomorrow, and whether or not, you may call for him at the office. He
  will be happy to see you. He said so, and said further that you needed
  no note of introduction.

  The review of your book appeared on 18th Nov., 1867, and you will see
  that also in the pile when you call.

                                        Faithfully yours,
                                                       J. C. SMITH.”

Thus began that support from the _Scotsman_, which, in the able hands of
Mr. Alexander Russel, was destined to be of such incalculable value to
the whole Feminist movement. The _Scotsman_ was just approaching the
height of its reputation, and its advocacy was the more valuable because
it was not supposed to have a specially weak side for new movements and
forlorn hopes. It used to be said in those days that, when the North
Pole was discovered, a Scotsman would be found sitting on it, and it
might have been added that the Scotsman would prove to be engrossed in
the newspaper that bore his name. In any case, from this moment on, all
that publicity could do for the cause was done. For better and for
worse, the doings of S. J.-B. were about to be writ large for the whole
world to read. They were the text round which the whole question was
threshed out by countless firesides,—the text on which the life and
character of every other woman provided a running commentary.

Small notion had S. J.-B. of the great flame that small spark was to
kindle. In her diary she speaks quite casually of “my” leader, “highly
approved by Masson.”

Meanwhile the canvassing was proceeding steadily, and S. J.-B.’s “thumb-
nail” notes and sketches of character often make interesting reading,—
none the less so because her gifts in this direction were necessarily
immature.

  “Thursday, 18th.... A long 1½ hours’ talk with Allman,—-going
  earnestly over every inch of ground, he very nice; at last, he ‘should
  be delighted to see me in his class,’ and he thought no legal
  objection against admission to classes, however about degrees. I am
  sure he will be a firm strong true friend.”

  “Friday, March 19th. Today for the first time the astounding idea
  dawned upon me that it was perhaps just possible that I really might
  succeed after all!

  _If I did!_—to enter first a British University!—(‘first’?—Yes, rather
  mean, I know, but instinctive!—)

  11 a.m. [after three hours’ work and visiting]—Fraser. Friendly, but
  rather non-committal,—speaking of it as a ‘matter for the medical
  faculty,’ etc.

  12. Balfour. At first rather wavering and weak. Didn’t see how a woman
  _could_ dissect, etc., till I told him ‘I’d done it for some months,’
  etc.... Ultimately a very valuable suggestion that he and A. should
  admit me to their summer courses, of Botany and Natural History, and
  then, if all went well I matriculate in October, and go to the rest.
  Proposes to call a Medical Faculty meeting next week if possible
  before Simpson goes.

  1.30, Lunch at the Grants. Very friendly and kind,—he with real
  English Oxford manner and courtesy,—she very kindly.

  He thought ‘all would agree as to end,—only difficulty as to means,’—
  agreed with Balfour’s idea of wisdom of deferring degree question. Was
  ‘very much interested’ in it all, and thought my going to see each of
  the Faculty would make a great difference.

  Told me that in a recent speech here, Jowett ‘hoped the Universities
  would open to women’ and was cheered greatly.

  Gave me (sealed) introduction to Christison (the ogre)—and authorized
  me to tell him ‘he should make no difficulty,’ etc.

  3 p.m. Henderson,—feared women ‘would get the cream of practice, if
  any’ (noble fear!)—would ‘think over it,’—-after a futile ‘non
  possumus’.”

On the following day S. J.-B. sent in her formal application to the Dean
of the Medical Faculty:

  “SIR,

        As I understand that the statutes of the University of Edinburgh
  do not in any way prohibit the admission of women, and as the
  Universities of Paris and Zurich have already been thrown open to
  them, I venture earnestly to request from you and the other gentlemen
  of the Medical Faculty permission to attend the lectures in your
  Medical School during the ensuing session.

  I beg to signify my willingness to accede to any such conditions, or
  agree to any such reservations as may seem desirable to you, and
  indeed to withdraw my application altogether if, after due and
  sufficient trial, it should be found impracticable to grant me a
  continuance of the favour which I now request. You, Sir, must be well
  aware of the almost insuperable difficulty of pursuing the study of
  Medicine under any conditions but those which can be commanded by
  large colleges only; and, in view of the increasing demand for the
  medical service of women among their own sex, I am sure that you will
  concede the great importance of providing for the adequate instruction
  of such as desire thoroughly to qualify themselves to fulfil the
  duties of the medical profession.

  Earnestly commending my request to the favourable consideration of
  yourself and your colleagues.

                               I am, Sir,
                                       Yours obediently,
                                                  SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.”

This letter is copied in her diary, and followed by the note:

  “Taken to him, and meeting called to oblige me at 1 p.m. Tuesday. Oh,
  dear, how these folks gain by comparison with Harvard!

  9.30 a.m. Turner. Quiet, thoughtful, realizing difficulty strongly,
  and referring to Christison as ‘our Nestor.’ Still listening heedfully
  and promising my words should ‘have due weight.’

  10.30. Christison. ‘The matter _has_ been decided.’ Not rude but quite
  uncompromising. He should use no influence, but vote against me.

  ... 2 p.m. Dr. Bennett, who declared himself tired of fighting Syme
  and Christison, but will, I think, do it. He railed at them most of
  the time. Did not see the need of women as doctors, but acknowledged
  their possible value as assistant physiologists....[51] Will admit me,
  if possible, to his non-obligatory histology class in summer....

  10 p.m. Was awfully cross at having to go to dine at ... and to tea at
  ..., but at the latter ‘met the gods,’—a _very_ nice woman of 33 or 34
  with curiously white hair,—Mrs. Evans, I think. She and I held
  together on almost all subjects. She would like to study Medicine (and
  I am sure has the power) but for an ‘old aunt.’ Oh, dear, the ‘might
  have beens’!—And yet here was I ten minutes ago defending ‘absolute
  right’ as the only rule.

  Curious though how one’s instinct leaps forward at the smallest
  chance.—‘Couldn’t we take a “flat” together?’”

Footnote 51:

  As Physiology was Dr. Bennett’s speciality, the admission was worth
  having.

  “Monday, March 22nd. A cup of tea and then to Simpson’s to breakfast.
  He said he should probably be here tomorrow and would go to the
  meeting if at all possible....

  Then ... to Laycock ... who was ‘frank’(!)—and told me ‘as a public
  man,’ etc., he must oppose,—informed me women ‘didn’t understand their
  position,’ that they did their own work in the world badly, that they
  had not sufficient strength for medical practice,—‘if women are fit
  for war, I will allow them fit for medicine.’ And, when I instanced
  the Amazons, thought that had nothing to do with it! Was sure women
  preferred men to do everything for them, even in shops;—and informed
  me no decent woman knew what young men are, or if she did, it was
  reprehensible, etc.

  After lunch to Syme,—he more favourable than I had expected. Did think
  women ought to supersede ‘that man in ... Street,’—and thought if it
  was clearly understood that they only meant to practise in Midwifery
  and uterine diseases, there ‘would be no opposition.’ Not to be
  present tomorrow any way.

  Spence,—rather doubtful-minded. Not strongly opposed,—might turn
  either way, but is, I think, rather kindly and not irrational.

  Then called on kind Lady Grant; then home to rest.”

  “Tuesday, 23rd. 10.30 a.m. Now, having done all that lies in one
  woman’s power—except, perhaps, an article in the _Daily Review_,—
  having left a book, as a reminder, on Bennett, hunted up Sir J. Y. S.
  and crammed him [with] Mlle Unpronounceable at St. Petersburg,—I have
  to do what is hardest of all,—wait.

  Four distinct votes in my favour, I believe, if all go and all keep
  faith with me. Allman ... Bennett, Balfour, Simpson.

  Against me distinctly,—Christison, Laycock, and probably Henderson.

  Doubtful,—Turner, Spence, and, perhaps, Syme.

  Besides Maclagan (ill), and Playfair (probably absent).[52]

Footnote 52:

    It must be borne in mind that at this time the question was before
    the Professors of the Medical Faculty only.

  To lunch with Simpson at 2 p.m., and hear results.

  1.45 p.m. Waiting for the verdict? How will it be? Somehow the
  probability seems rather for me this time,—but there,—the Fates are so
  habitually adverse! I can’t help hoping and yet I _don’t_ expect
  success. I hope they won’t ‘give an uncertain sound’ and put it off
  indefinitely!

  8 p.m.—Gloria tibi Domine!...

  At 2 p.m. went to Sir J. Y. S.,—found him out, but met him in the
  street. ‘Yes, ye’re to be let in to the classes if the Senatus allow
  ye,—‘ of course with all provisos as to ‘tentative,’ etc. But the
  great fact is granted,—the thin end of the wedge in, and, though
  nothing is secure till after the Senatus on Saturday, yet it is an
  enormous triumph!

  Three more days’ of calling and entreating and arguing,—then ‘after
  all these voices ... peace.’

  After all, my aspiration to L. E. S. was not so ill-founded,—‘If I can
  be the first woman to open a British University’—then surely I, like
  Charlotte Brontë ‘shall have served, my heart and I’—even if I die
  straightway.

  For May, June and July, the Botany, Natural History, and Histology,
  with preparation for the Matriculation exam.

  Oh, dear, I do feel so exultant.... In one sense I do see all the
  life-preamble to have been needed. The experience in the United States
  gave me much more chance of success now,—the life there gave me health
  really to use the chance when it comes.

  I hardly fear the future at all;—not the students, nor the work.

  I am sorry not to be with Mother, but on the whole this must be best,
  I think.

  Four years of College! All alone? Surely not literally all the time—
  spiritually, who knows?

  What a pity, as I said to U.D. that they will use up gold for
  toasting-forks!

  Well, I am sure the hind-wheels may run by faith for a long time now.
  Perhaps the tangle is beginning to unravel after all these years,—and
  I shall have to cry, ‘Oh, why didn’t I bear on better then!’ I suppose
  that is always the feeling when the cloud begins to lift. But _till_
  it lifts,—

          ‘Still it is hard. No darkness will be light
          Though we should call it light from night till morn.’

  And surely the Father pitieth His children.”

The numberless quotations in the course of her diary,—however
fundamentally optimistic—are almost always in a minor key; but the minor
key proves inadequate in the face of this great joy. One can see the
dark eyes flash as she goes on,—

                 “‘Fair are the Marcian kalends,
                 The proud ides, when the squadron rides,
                 Shall be Rome’s whitest day.’

  Surely I shall have to institute a festival for March 23rd. I wonder
  who’s the saint. It will be very odd if any other day in my life will
  be (if all goes well) as vital an epoch as today....

  I feel as if everybody was my peer today, for I want everybody to
  shake hands with me. I am so glad. Dear old Mother!—why are you not
  here to kiss me?... O.H.?... L.E.S.?... Ursula?... Perhaps _your_
  thought is nearest me tonight, because you more than any perhaps
  realize the day of crisis....”

  “Wednesday, March 24th. How very nice it is to wake with a sense of
  something very good in the wind!”

Indeed it is small wonder that she was elated. Everyone had assured her
that the opposition of the doctors was the thing to be feared, and now
the Medical Faculty had recorded its vote in her favour. True, the
permission only applied, in the first instance, to the Summer Term, and
some of the professors may well have thought that the Summer Term would
be more than enough to quench the ardour of the solitary woman student.
But there is really no need to enquire into the manifold motives that
may have swayed them. They had done what she asked, and it was scarcely
to be supposed that the professors of the other faculties would prove
more obdurate. One thinks with satisfaction of some of the men with whom
she now had to deal,—Professor Masson was not the only rock among them.
One has but to recall the names of Professor Calderwood, Professor
Lorimer, Professor Wilson, and others too, in order to realise that, so
far as they were concerned, her feet were on sure ground.

The diary of March 24th continues:

  “Then to Masson’s, where I got 5 introductions. He very hopeful, I
  think. Seems not to think the University Court have the right to
  interfere.

  Then to Tytler’s. He very quiet and legal. ‘Should go to the Senatus
  quite unprejudiced,’—which was hardly all I wanted!...

  ... In afternoon went with Mr. Begbie to see ... Calderwood,—at home
  and quite favourable. Should support me on Saturday. ‘Fine speaker,’
  says Begbie.

  Then Tait,—quite favourable.

  Fleeming Jenkin,—rather so,—indeed I think he almost promised to vote
  for me, but feared some legal difficulties as to Matriculation, etc.

  After Begbie went home, I saw Kelland,—he mildly favourable,—but saw
  ‘difficulties.’ Still will vote, I think.

  In the evening at Blackies’. He with clear pure face, white hair and
  straw hat! Half mad looking, certainly. But showed me favourable
  passages in his Notes on the Iliad, etc.—XI. 740—, and ‘unless he
  hears strong things to the contrary’ will support me. Mrs. Blackie
  also nice, I think,—not commonplace.”

  “Thursday, 25th. Congratulations from Mother and U.D.... Left Iliad
  notes at Blackie’s. Then saw Lorimer. Very kind and friendly. ‘Very
  glad to see me.’ Introduced me to Mrs. Lorimer, was ‘sure women could
  do work men couldn’t’, etc., and were needed. Introduced me to
  M‘Pherson, saying he ‘sufficiently expressed his opinion by saying he
  intended to vote for me.’

  Which McPherson _doesn’t_. Not disagreeable however, though less
  earnestminded than most.

  Cosmo Innes. Painfully deaf, but very friendly. Much interested about
  my written communications about Bologna. Will support me. I’m to send
  him facts from British Museum.

  Muirhead—I had been taught to fear as surely opposed. So he was at
  first, but candid and earnest and kind, and said at last, ‘You have
  disposed of many of my objections.’ Much interested as to University
  statistics,—Bologna, etc. Suggested Balfour should write for
  information to Paris and Zurich.

  Then bought stockings and basket, and called on Miss Blyth, and came
  home pretty well done up. Now to start again soon.

  (I hear Mr. M., downstairs, is interested to hear they have ‘that
  lady’ here!)

  3 p.m. Professor Playfair has been here,—very kindly,—very much in
  earnest,—laying stress on Bologna degrees, etc. Introduction to Piazzi
  Smith,—‘I am strongly in favour of granting her desire to attend the
  classes, with the view of taking the degree in Medicine. She is
  thoroughly in earnest and desires no favour. Do give her an
  opportunity of stating her case to you.’

  Then with D. B. M. to Stevenson ... who thinks it ‘haigh taime’ to
  have female practitioners, and means to vote for me, I think.

  Then D. B. M. home, and with Mr. Begbie to Dr. C. who seems to have
  been at a Tory clack with Christison and Co. in the morning and won’t
  help me. He most naïvely let out ‘what Christison meant to do,’—i.e.
  argue that the Senate could not act without more legal advice,—delay,—
  and if possible refer to Chancellor Inglis. Whereon I wrote to Tait,
  Innes and Playfair to put on guard.

  6 p.m. Dinner at 22 Manor Place....

  By the bye, how queerly much impressed Muirhead was with the ‘trouble
  I had taken’ at British Museum, etc.”

  “Friday 26th. This morning at 10.30, to Piazzi Smith,—deaf and very
  hard to get at. Declared nothing but Astronomy to be his business,—and
  particularly no science used for money-getting!—Then he rambled off to
  ‘supply before demand’—Meteorological Society and Mr. Lowe, etc., and
  Registrar of Deaths, etc. Then—had a ladies’ meeting been called to
  declare they would employ women, etc.... However I might be sure he
  ‘would not vote against me,’ and advised me not to be discouraged!...
  Oh, dear, what a strain it is on one to have to sit out that sort of
  thing!

  2 p.m. came Professor Wilson,—very kind and friendly,—though, having
  inadvertently shown him my list, he instantly pounced down on his own
  name and asked my authority. So I gave up Playfair instantly!... A
  grave good thoughtful man,—a very sound champion.

  Then to see Lorimer who encourages me finely.”

  “Saturday March 27th. Went with Mr. Begbie to see Oakeley (at school
  with Tom) Oxfordish (i.e. non enthusiastic), but civil enough. Said he
  should support.

  11 a.m. Fraser. The Medical Faculty having agreed, he was ready to do
  so too. I specially pleaded against “shelving” the question.

  Indeed I hope with all my writing and speaking and warning (including
  my rather ill-advised raid on Balfour at College this morning) I have
  put a spoke in Christison’s wheel. Just about voting on it, I
  suppose,—3.30 p.m.

  It is to be hoped Wilson will be prophetic,—‘We’ll have a great fight,
  but we’ll beat them!’

  10 p.m. Success,—and _such_ a success,—14 to 4!—‘Nunc dimittis’?—No,
  surely,—fresh zeal and energy for lifelong work.

  Isn’t it _good_ after such a fortnight of rush and battle and strain
  to go to bed, saying,—‘The work is done!’

  ‘Of all the gifts of God...!’”

It is interesting to note that the speakers in S. J.-B.’s favour at the
Meeting of Senatus were:—Professors Balfour, Tait, Lorimer, Fleeming
Jenkin, Masson, Blackie, Bennett, and Sir Alexander Grant. Against her
were Professors Christison, Turner, Laycock and Craufurd. To her great
surprise Professor Muirhead gave notice of an appeal to the University
Court. Professor Playfair was out of town, but the following letter has
been preserved:

                                                   “University Club,
                                                      Edinburgh.
                                                     26 March, 69.

  MY DEAR MASSON,

        I have to express my regret that, in ignorance of there being a
  Senatus Meeting tomorrow, I had made an important engagement in
  Fifeshire.

  I cordially concur in the recommendation of the Medical Faculty, that
  Miss Blake should be allowed to attend the Summer classes. If no
  inconvenience be found in practice, there are many precedents for
  female graduation, and for female professors. Pope Joan herself is an
  instance, although she professed and graduated in male attire. But
  lesser people than a pope may be adduced as precedents, in Salamanca,
  Bologna and Padua, especially from the thirteenth century onwards. Sir
  Roundell Palmer would not object on the ground of the legality of the
  prospect of female graduation, though if he were a member of Senatus
  he might doubt the expediency.

  For my part, I have faith that the students will act like gentlemen,
  and will prove that the tentative session has not been lost by
  discourtesy on their part.

                                  Yours sincerely,
                                                     LYON PLAYFAIR.”




                               CHAPTER IV
                                A CHECK


On the day following that memorable meeting of Senatus, S. J.-B. had a
curious conversation with the wife of one of the professors:

  “Mrs. A. tells me Christison actually threatened to resign if women
  are admitted!—and to the Medical Faculty this is a formidable threat.
  She thinks also ‘the professors haven’t treated me fairly’ (which I
  deny) in not letting me know how much they dislike the whole thing.
  Doubtless A. does,—and the babble of her bourne is magnified to her.

  Still I know all is not yet gained. Yet surely very much _is_. And can
  ‘He so far have brought me’—? Not that that is a real argument,
  because if it fails we must suppose failure is right in one sense.

  Amusing how much personal power Mrs. A. attributes to me, ‘You’ve just
  turned them round your thumb,—I don’t believe there’s another woman
  could have done it,—_you_ are wholly exceptional, etc.’ I say ‘very
  complimentary, but I think not quite true.’ She thinks I’ve been
  ‘wonderfully clever,’ and when I object to the phrase, ‘have really
  shown wonderful _power_ and tact.’

  I’m afraid one can’t help being a little pleased to think one’s own
  effort has done something,—and yet the other feeling lies deeper:

                   ‘If Thou didst will, a mighty sword
                   Out of my stem should grow.’

  By the bye U. D. thinks my poem[53] the saddest in the book, ‘Poor
  child’ [she says] ‘_how_ sorry I am for you! Oh, if the atmosphere of
  Easter joy which is bright round me were only your’s too, ... Such an
  “only this,”—it would be better to be in the blackest night with the
  hope of stumbling into broad daylight some time or other. It is the
  sort of hopelessness of any more light to come that makes the poem so
  sad to me.’

  I don’t agree. I think the ‘only this’ is just everything,—enough to
  live on and die on, though not enough (what is?) to prevent life being
  very hard and stony. It seems to me just the essence of the—

               ‘... strenuous souls for belief and prayer—
               Who stand in the dark on the lowest stair
                 Affirming of God,—He is certainly there.’

  And did even Christ keep that much always?—

  I believe Miss Cobbe is right,—in every Calvary there must be
  ‘darkness over the face of all the land’ for awhile.

  Well, indeed, if we can always keep a firm grip of—

            ‘Only this, that He knoweth the way that I tread,
            And His banner of crimson is over my head.’

  And again,—

          ‘This only for solace,—God knoweth indeed
          Where the poverty galls,—of what things we have need.’

  At 1.30 came Mrs. Evans with her clear good eyes and face. Much
  disposed at least to Botany. _How_ I hope she will!”

Footnote 53:

  “Walking in Darkness.”

Meanwhile S. J.-B. was undoubtedly the woman of the moment, and she had
the satisfaction—by no means an unbroken one as life went on—of feeling
herself a thoroughly popular person. She lunched with this dignitary and
dined with that; some of the wives of the Professors offered to
accompany her to the lectures if no other women came forward to join
her; and some students whom she met at dinner told her they thought the
students would be delighted that she should join the class.

Apparently this sanguine view was a mistaken one, for an agitation was
raised among some of the men—at whose instigation we have no means of
knowing—which resulted in another appeal to the University Court against
the decision of the Senatus.

Very characteristically, but with Professor Masson’s approval, S. J.-B.
had called on Professor Muirhead to ask him the grounds of his appeal.
He told her he had appealed because he did not think the question had
been fully considered, and he thought the vote of the Senatus had
settled the question too finally for _all_ women. He pointed out that,
as things stood, she _must_ matriculate even to go to the lectures, but
held out hopes that the University Court could give tentative
permission. He was “not at all unfriendly,” and showed her cases of
mediaeval women doctors to add to the strength of her armoury.

Meanwhile Lord Advocate Moncrieff had proved “kindly and favourable,”
and the Lord Provost, “very lordly in his big chair, but rather
gracious” had promised to give the question “his best consideration.”
Sir Alexander Grant thought the thing was won with the Professors, and
had “hardly a doubt” of the University Court.

                  *       *       *       *       *

When, on March 31st of that eventful year, S. J.-B. returned to
Brighton, she fully believed that her cause was so far gained, and there
is not the smallest doubt that a number of the professors shared her
belief. One cannot read the diary and the letters of the periods without
feeling how much cause there was for confident anticipation; but we have
only to turn to dry-as-dust facts, to the constitution of Edinburgh
University, in order to realize how precarious the situation was.

There were no less than four bodies whose business it was to consider
the question at stake, and who—in addition to the Chancellor—had to be
consulted before any important change could be made:

  1. The Medical Faculty, consisting of Medical Professors only.

  This hurdle, as the reader is aware, had been somewhat unexpectedly
  passed.

  2. The Senatus, comprising all the Professors of every Faculty.

  This obstacle, too had been passed.

  3. The University Court, composed of the Rector, the Principal, the
  Lord Provost of Edinburgh,—with five others appointed respectively by
  the Chancellor, the Rector, the Senatus, the Town Council of
  Edinburgh, and the General Council of the University.

  4. The General Council, comprising all those graduates who register
  their names as members.

Mr. Sidgwick’s remarks about Convocation naturally occur to one at this
stage; but what mainly strikes one on facing these particulars is the
extraordinary constitution of No. 3 as a body authorized to reconsider
the decisions of No. 2. The Rector was some distinguished man who might
never have been in Edinburgh in his life; the Lord Provost may be fairly
supposed to have his hands pretty full without taking upon him the
consideration of highly technical questions that lay outside his sphere.
As for some of the other members,—one can only say that the manner of
their election calls up possibilities concerning them too varied for the
human mind to grasp.

No doubt there were occasions on which this “lay control” had its
advantages; but, when one considers how much must depend on the point of
view from which the case was laid before the Court, one cannot but feel
that it lay in the power of so singularly-constituted a body to defeat
the very end for which it was created.

From S. J.-B.’s point of view then, as we have seen, two hurdles had
been successfully passed; but the dangers of the third may be estimated
from the fact—the importance of which she as an outsider could not
possibly gauge—that her avowed and implacable opponent, “our Nestor,”
Dr. Robert Christison, was the only Professor and the only medical man
who had a seat on the University Court. He had in fact the unique
distinction of belonging to every body by which the interests of the
women had to be decided, viz. the Medical Faculty, the Senatus, the
University Court, the University Council, and the Infirmary Board.

Add to all this that he was a respected and representative citizen, one
who made a strong appeal to the religious and church-going public. “No
man,” said Professor Masson about this time, “walks the streets of
Edinburgh whom I more respect; ... but this is not the first time, and I
suppose it will not be the last, when grave and wise men will be found
defending a dying tyranny.”

Professor Masson’s feeling for the great man was destined to be sorely
tried.

It will surprise no one, then, to learn that on April 19th, the
following resolution was passed at a meeting of the University Court
held, as was the custom, in strict privacy:

  “That the Court, considering the difficulties at present standing in
  the way of carrying out the resolution of the Senatus, as a temporary
  arrangement in the interest of one lady, and not being prepared to
  adjudicate finally on the question whether women should be educated in
  the medical classes of the University, sustains the appeals and
  recalls the resolution of the Senatus.”

“As a temporary arrangement in the interests of one lady.”

Supposing that the decision of the University Court was really to be
taken at its face value, so to speak, it was one of which nobody could
fairly complain. Was it not simply another way of saying,—“If this
counsel or this work be of men it will come to nought”? For, although it
be true that “God and one man make a majority,” the fighter who has God
on his side does not indefinitely remain alone, even so far as his
fellow men are concerned.

The mere fact of the adverse decision is recorded in the diary almost
without comment. One is glad to think that when S. J.-B. received the
news she was among her friends in the south, and no longer so dependent
on the lonely solace of an unwritten page. On April 26th she wrote to
Dr. Sewall:

  “You will have seen my bad news in the papers I sent you on Saturday,—
  I can no longer urge you to come and settle in Edinburgh, for all my
  plans there have been overturned again. The University Court has
  actually vetoed the permission given by the Medical Faculty and
  confirmed by the whole Senatus (or conjoined faculties).

  This is very unusual and seems _very_ hard.

  I expect to go to Scotland in a week or two still, to see whether
  nothing can be done about it. If I had any legal standpoint I would
  take the matter into the Courts.[54] If I _can’t_ get in at Edinburgh,
  then I shall try Glasgow, etc., but I should very much prefer
  Edinburgh....

  You see it is very well that I asked you not to talk about Edinburgh
  to other folks. When I really succeed, you may ‘boast’ as much as you
  please! I am sure that anything I ever do in Medicine will be all
  yours.

  I am so glad that you are prospering so well, and getting patients
  sent you by the men. Thank you for all the papers you send me,—when
  you send whole papers, do _mark_ the paragraph....

  I am glad you like my Essay. It will be a good deal better when it is
  rewritten, for I have a good deal of new evidence to bring in. It
  _may_ be out in July, or it may wait till October.

  I have had terrible wear and tear to go through the last two months.
  Edinburgh was _very very_ tiring work,—to repeat endless arguments to
  an endless succession of people took so very much out of one,—and then
  too there was really a great deal to _do_, and tho’ I took cabs
  recklessly I could not but get very tired....

  I am sure you are right about women being fitter to understand women.
  I will put in some more about that. Do you know whenever it comes home
  to me personally I am more and more amazed how women _can_ go to men
  for uterine treatment. I think that, sooner than go to any, I would
  come across the Atlantic again to you. I wish you would let me know
  how often doctors have sent you their own relations. I wish Dr. Cabot
  or some leading doctor would publish a pamphlet or something
  expressing his strong belief in the ‘_need_ of women doctors for young
  girls.’ This is the point that hits the public hardest, I think. If he
  could write me a short note that I could quote in my Essay, with or
  without his name, I would do so....

  There is such a nice girl here,—Ursula Du Pre (a sort of connection of
  Mrs. Jenkinson’s) who would like very much to study medicine, but her
  Mother objects strongly and she is too ill to be worried, she thinks.

  It is a thousand pities, for she would make a splendid doctor;[55]
  and, being extremely ‘well-born,’ it would have an excellent effect
  for her to study. She is very anxious to see you,—she has fallen in
  love with your picture. I tell everybody that neither that nor
  anything else can tell them _how_ good and sweet you are, my dear
  child.

                                 Your very aff.
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

Footnote 54:

  This suggestion had been made to her by one of the legal professors.

Footnote 55:

  “Tell me everything that happens,” writes Miss Du Pre about this time,
  “so that I may not lose the thread of your history. I think I know
  most of the people’s names now, and should not require much
  explanation. You need not tell me in _every_ letter that Sir A. Grant
  is the Principal. I’ll try to remember that fact.”

Meanwhile she was not left without sympathy from those whose sympathy
was a distinction in itself. On April 5th Professor Masson had written:

  “DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Here is the latest news. The case was to come up today before
  the University Court—with these two new elements,—of which I heard
  only on Saturday: viz. (i) That Professor Turner has appealed
  independently to the Court, and (2) That there is a petition against
  you to the Court by a large number of students—not gainsaying the
  propriety of women studying or practising Medicine, but laying stress
  on the difficulty and the injury to male students, should a lady
  student be admitted to open lectures on certain medical subjects, so
  that a Professor should be forced to abstain from exhaustive treatment
  of those subjects.

  It was known at a Senatus meeting on Saturday, that the appeal, with
  these new conditions, might come before the University Court today;
  and, in view of this, Professor Balfour and myself were deputed to
  appear before the Court and defend the vote of the Senatus,—
  representing the reasons of the majority of the Senatus for the vote
  and replying to any new objections.

  We were at our post for the purpose today; but the University Court—
  whether from an excess of business, or because of a desire for delay
  in this particular question,—postponed the consideration of your case
  till the 19th of this month. So nothing was done today.

  On the whole I am of opinion that delay will do no harm. Prof.
  Muirhead appeals (as far as I can understand him) not as an enemy, but
  in order that there may be farther discussion. Professor Turner’s
  appeal is grounded, I believe, on his own difficulty as regards
  Anatomy. And then there will be time for outside influences, and the
  considerations they may induce....

  Had I known in time that I should be deputed to defend the case, I
  would have written to you to request suggestions. As it is, there is
  plenty of time now, and what occurs to me immediately is that any
  facts showing the prevalence of right opinion in British Society (both
  Whig and Tory) might be converted into argument. Please write to me
  anything that you can collect on this head, i.e. facts and names to
  prove that the tendency to open the profession to women is approved by
  eminent and representative personages, of different political
  opinions, throughout the country.

  I will write again. Meanwhile, with doubled zeal for all that has
  happened, I am,

                                  resolutely Yours,
                                                       DAVID MASSON.

  P.S. Prof. Balfour received this morning a letter from the Medical
  Dean at Zurich of very satisfactory tenor.”

                                              “3, Rosebery Crescent,
                                                April 20th, 1869.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I regret to have to tell you that it went against you at the
  University Court yesterday. After the three appellants (Profs.
  Muirhead, Turner and Laycock) had been heard on the one side, and
  Prof. Balfour and I on the other, we left the Court to their private
  deliberations. These were long, and resulted, I understand, in an
  agreement to something like this effect—that considering the extreme
  inconvenience that would attend any present arrangement for the end in
  view, especially when that is demanded for only one lady, the Court,
  without pronouncing on the general question whether ladies ought to be
  educated in the medical classes at the University, do not consider it
  expedient, etc. I tried to get the exact terms of the resolution, but,
  not having seen the Secretary, report the substance as it was told me
  by Principal Sir A. Grant, and Mr. Nicolson. The _Scotsman_ of
  tomorrow will probably have the communicated report: if so, I will
  send it to you.

  Only five of the Court were present,—the Principal, Mr. Gordon, Dr.
  Christison, Mr. Phin and Mr. Nicolson. I believe the petition of the
  180 students against you was really the determining argument,—the
  Court foreseeing the chance of a disturbance, and not being prepared
  to run the risk. Except two, I rather gathered that those present
  favoured the notion of the medical education of women, if
  circumstances would permit, and, on the whole, what has occurred to
  me, since I learnt the decision, is, that, if a new attempt were to be
  made, on the University of Edinburgh (and I hope there will), and if
  it were to come in the form of a joint and simultaneous application
  from a few ladies (say from half a dozen to a dozen), then our
  authorities would be obliged to yield and to betake themselves to the
  consideration of the means whereby such a class could be best
  conducted—how far along with the men, how far apart.

  Much chagrined at the result, but with the firm conviction that your
  application and visit have done great good, and led to an advance in
  the right direction beyond what could have been anticipated.

                         I am,
                             dear Miss Jex-Blake,
                                       Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

                                        “Aberdour, Fife, April 20th.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Your letter has followed me to this place, which must be my
  apology for not replying to it at once. I was indeed annoyed at the
  reversal of our judgment in your case at the University Court,—the
  more so considering how the Court,—at all times a most absurd body to
  review the decisions of the Senate—was constituted on that particular
  occasion. I have not a copy of the Universities Act with me, and I
  cannot therefore express any opinion as to whether this decision falls
  under the category of those which are reversible by the Queen in
  Council. If it does belong to this category I should say that your
  best course was at once to carry it there, and I should say, with the
  majority you had both in the Medical Faculty and in the Senatus, that
  the reversal of the decision of so very insignificant and prejudged a
  body as the Court was which judged of your case was pretty nearly
  certain. If this cannot be done—which Masson or Playfair or Sir A.
  Grant will at once tell you,—then I suspect the best thing is to bring
  the case before the next meeting of the University Council. It has no
  power to decide, but it may recommend to the University Court, and
  that will bring the matter up again, and the constitution of the Court
  can be better looked after than it appears to have been this time. It
  may be also—though here again I am speaking without the Act, that such
  a recommendation could be carried beyond the Court to the Queen in
  Council. Any claim to admission on a legal construction of the Charter
  would involve you in a law-suit which would not be decided for years
  and would cost _x_=£s.!! Against that course I have no hesitation in
  advising you, as a question of personal interest and comfort, though
  of the legal merits of the question I can say nothing. I certainly, in
  your case, however, would lose no time in seeing the Lord Advocate.
  Substantially, I think he will be with you, and his advice in all such
  matters is of great value, and will, I feel sure, be willingly given.

  Mrs. Lorimer joins me in very kind regards, and in sympathy for the
  annoyance which you are subjected to, and I am,

                                   Yours very faithfully,
                                                        J. LORIMER.”

In a later letter Professor Lorimer says:

  “There is one point on which I find I am with you against many of my
  colleagues—even those who are guided by reason and not by tradition,
  viz. as to whether Medicine ought to be taught to ladies separately,
  or in the open classes along with the male students. As regards the
  question of delicacy, I am clearly and strongly of opinion that in
  holding the latter view your female instincts have guided you right.
  The root of indelicacy is immodesty, and the root of immodesty is
  immorality, and the arrangement that would in my opinion be immodest,
  and might be immoral, would be that such subjects should be taught by
  _one_ man to _one_ woman. The farther you recede from _that_
  arrangement, the more you separate yourself from the circumstances in
  which according to a well-known legal _brocard_, ‘charity ceases.’

  The opposite pole as it seems to me, is the teaching of science
  publicly in an open class, irrespective of the sex, age, or other
  peculiarities of the audience; and mindful only of _truth_.

  I am aware, however, that there are other considerations which
  influence Sir Alexander Grant, and other members of Senatus who would
  probably agree with me on this point. If young men and women were
  thrown together daily, they say, imprudent marriages and the like
  would come of it. Even here, however, I think the balance of evil is
  on the existing arrangement, and not on that which you propose to
  substitute for it. I have not seen Mr. Mill’s ‘Subjection of Women’
  and I don’t go in much for that sort of thing, but I cannot see why
  greater harm should come of men and women meeting at their occupations
  than at their amusements; and I think imprudent marriages are just as
  likely to come of croquet parties and riding-lessons as of medical
  lectures.

  As in later life one is sometimes apt to be deceived as to one’s
  earlier feelings, I asked a young bachelor whom most Edinburgh Mamas
  would _not_ consider ‘an imprudent marriage’ what his feelings were on
  the subject; and his reply was ‘Anything rather than those dreary
  balls and idiotic evening parties which at present afford the only
  occasions on which men who go in for work in the early part of the day
  can make the acquaintance of persons of the other sex.’

  It can scarcely be doubted that by _working_ together men and women
  would learn to know each other better, and that many _mistakes_ that
  are now committed, would be avoided.

  With kind regards from Mrs. Lorimer, believe me.

                                 Yours very truly,
                                                        J. LORIMER.”

No one who has grasped something of S. J.-B.’s character will imagine
that she was likely to mistake a check for a checkmate, though she
sometimes made the converse mistake. She seems to have had some little
correspondence with Professor (afterwards Sir Lyon) Playfair, for the
following letter is among her papers:

                                         “Athenæum Club,
                                             London, 10th May, 1869.

  DEAR MISS BLAKE,

  I was much obliged by the list of women graduates and grieved at the
  result of your case in Edinburgh.

  There is no power of appeal against the decision of the University
  Court. You had overcome the prejudices of the profession, but not
  those of the students. With their strong opposition the University
  Court could not possibly decide otherwise, for Scottish Universities,
  without endowments, cannot go in face of the Constituency by which
  they are supported. It would not do to ruin classes by the admission
  of one pupil against the opinion of all the others. Though I regret
  the result, I am not surprised at it. In the face of this prejudice,
  the only hope that I see is for intending female graduates presenting
  themselves in sufficient numbers to induce the Universities to give
  them a separate education though a common graduation.

                                     Yours truly,
                                                     LYON PLAYFAIR.”

“What I thought and think,” wrote Sir Alexander Grant, “is that if a
sufficient number of ladies could be found to constitute a small extra-
academical class in medical subjects, the University of Edinburgh would
be willing to make arrangements for the teaching of such a class, and to
examining the lady pupils with a view to awarding them medical degrees.”

In her diary S. J.-B. writes,

  “Tuesday, May 11th.... Wrote today to ask to see Goschen,—see if
  anything _can_ be made of appeal.”

  “Friday. Saw Goschen, who will have the Act ‘looked up’ about appeals.
  Lord Advocate also to ‘write.’ Slept at Hampstead Heath.”

  “Saturday. Croquet. Came to Brighton by noon train.”

She used to recall many years later how on these much-prized visits to
the Corderys, some of the young folks got up at 6 o’clock in the morning
to have another game of croquet before the work of the day began.

  “Wednesday. Met U. at Waterloo Bridge. It did me good to see her. Had
  just heard ‘No appeal’ from Moncrieff, and no support except for
  private classes from Grant.”

Here then she was obliged to stop and take breath. Failure? Surely not.
I think no one can view the subject all round, as we have done in the
foregoing chapters,—realizing something of the forces that were arrayed
against her—without a feeling of amazement that she should have
accomplished so much. Whatever the mistakes and failures of her
subsequent life, that first campaign must surely be pronounced an
astonishing success.




                               CHAPTER V
                OPENING OF EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY TO WOMEN




The results of the campaign, duly chronicled in the _Scotsman_, filtered
through into other papers, and a certain amount of public interest was
the result. Before many days had passed the following letter came to
nerve a possibly flagging arm:

                                             “8 Bedford Square, W.C.
                                                 May 15th. 69.

  MADAM,

        I venture to write to you as I see that the decision of the
  University Court at Edinboro is based on the fact that they do not
  feel justified in making ‘a temporary arrangement in the interest of
  one lady.’ I also gather from the article in the _Scotsman_ on the
  subject of your application that you are desirous that in some cases
  private instruction should be taken instead of compulsory attendance
  at the public classes.

  As these are your views, I should be glad, if you renew your
  application, to join you in doing so, and I believe I know two or
  three other ladies who would be willing to do the same....

  Trusting you will pardon my troubling you on account of the great
  interest I feel in promoting the entrance of women into the medical
  profession, believe me, Madam,

                                 Yours truly,
                                                      ISABEL THORNE.

  Miss Jex-Blake.”

A few days later came an equally interesting letter from Mrs. Butler:

  “Your Essay is in Macmillan’s hands. You will receive a proof soon. I
  have asked him also to let me see one, and to let you have a duplicate
  to send to America.

  I read it once again before sending it away. It is well worth while to
  have included in it so much research. It gives one strongly the
  impression while reading it, how much the present male monopoly of the
  profession is an innovation; also how at all times women seem to have
  striven to assert their right to a share in the healing art. I cannot
  help hoping the publication of your Essay may be the beginning of a
  new social era in those matters. God grant that it may!

  It is indeed most trying to be kept back so long by the difficulty of
  getting leave to do good and to toil. O England, what a wicked amount
  of conservatism of selfish customs have you to answer for! I daresay
  to yourself your life must appear sometimes to be being wasted—but it
  is not so. In every good cause there must be martyrs and pioneers,
  who, with gifts for more, have had the hard task of opening the way
  for others to work. I saw a Miss Pechey at Leeds, who wishes to become
  a doctor, and Miss Wolstenholme told me of a lady she knows who is
  studying.

  I don’t think the story about the Greek lady at all indelicate. I hope
  no one else will think so. Is it not strange how people cry out at the
  indelicacy of _speaking_ of a thing which it is far more indelicate
  should _exist_, and yet to its existence they have no objection.

In a later letter she says:

  “... Have you _seen_ Miss Pechey? She did not seem to me very clever,
  but very steady and nice,—a silent, quiet woman.”

One knows the fine reserve under which Edith Pechey’s great gifts lay
hidden. “I only wish,” wrote a friend who knew her well, “that there
were 12 more _like_ her ready to begin.”

This is what Miss Pechey had to say for herself:

  “Before deciding finally to enter the medical profession, I should
  like to feel sure of success—not on my own account, but I feel that
  failure now would do harm to the cause, and that it is well that at
  least the first few women who offer themselves as candidates should
  stand above the average of men in their examinations.

  Do you think anything more is requisite to ensure success than
  moderate abilities and a good share of perseverance? I believe I may
  lay claim to these, together with a real love of the subjects of
  study, but as regards any thorough knowledge of those subjects at
  present, I fear I am deficient in most. I am afraid I should not
  without a good deal of previous study be able to pass the preliminary
  exam, you mention, as my knowledge of Latin is small and of Euclid
  still less. Still, if no very extensive knowledge of these is required
  (and doctors generally seem to know very little of them) I could
  perhaps be ready by the next exam., and the study of Carpenter at the
  same time would be a relaxation. Could you give me any idea when the
  next matriculation exam. will be held, and whether candidates are
  examined in _all_ the books of Euclid. If I thought I could prepare
  myself in time for this, I think I could arrange pecuniary and other
  matters so as to enter in October as you advise; and, though for some
  reasons I should prefer to wait another year, yet, as I am nearly 24,
  it will perhaps be better to lose no time.

  Allow me to thank you for your kindness in assisting me with your
  advice. I feel especially grateful as I have no friend able to supply
  the information I need.

                               Believe me, dear Madam,
                                       Yours sincerely,
                                                      EDITH PECHEY.”

We know how warmly S. J.-B. felt that the thanks were not all on the
side of her unknown correspondents, and she would have felt this even
more if she had known the sheer value as human beings of her first two
recruits. Taking the trio together, one simply could not have wished for
abler representatives of a struggling cause.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile a new avenue of hope had opened quite unexpectedly; Mrs. Jex-
Blake had been seriously ill, and her daughter had taken her to consult
Dr. King Chambers.

  “I liked Dr. Chambers very much,” she writes to Dr. Sewall. “I first
  had a talk with him alone, and told him I was studying Medicine, about
  which he was very kind. He seemed to think that if women were willing
  to pay for separate Anatomical teaching, they could get into almost
  any of the London schools, and promised to enquire about his own
  school,—St. Mary’s. I doubt whether the way is quite so open as he
  thinks, but I shall be very glad to hear his report, and meanwhile
  shall go on to Edinbro’ and see what can be done there by way of a
  separate class. It would be a much greater thing in the end to get the
  Universities open, for of course the other medical schools feed
  Apothecaries’ Hall and the College of Surgeons, and do not give the
  M.D.

  I think it very possible that by guaranteeing some sufficient fees for
  two or three courses (_whatever_ the number of pupils) we could get
  the thing _tried_, and, when once publicly done, I am sure numbers
  would flock in. I had rather borrow and spend some money about it than
  be bothered any more. But of that I can tell you more next week.”

In her diary she writes (June 19th):

  “After opposite advice from Mrs. Butler (for St. Mary’s), and Salzmann
  (Edinbro’) and much deliberation, decided for ‘baith, my lord.’ The
  petition to go today to Dr. Chambers (signed by Miss Pechey and Mrs.
  Thorne),—mine to Senatus on 25th. and to University Court July 5th.”

Dr. King Chambers spared himself no trouble in the matter.

  “I have got over the chief difficulty,” he writes, “viz., that of
  engaging the Anatomy lecturer, Mr. Arthur Norton, to undertake a class
  of ladies. There is also a room they could have for dissecting, and
  arrangements may be made with the porter’s wife to take care of their
  cloaks and attend to their comforts. The other lecturers shall be
  approached in due course, but I think Mr. Norton is the chief one to
  be considered. What number of ladies can you get to form a class?”

A fortnight later, however, he is obliged to write:

  “DEAR MADAM,

        I fear you will be disappointed with the result of my
  application to the School Committee of St. Mary’s. It was a full
  meeting which had been already called on another subject; so I took
  the opportunity of getting as many of my colleagues as possible to
  freely state their opinions. And the result is my agreeing with the
  idea you expressed in your note, that the most insuperable of your
  difficulties lay in the direction of the students—to which I may add
  their parents and guardians; of whom, as customers, private firms in
  the position of the medical schools of London, must stand in awe. Such
  a sort of partnership is essentially opposed to change, as, if even a
  minority object to a novelty, their colleagues shrink from forcing it
  upon them.

  It seems hard that British women should be sent abroad to get that of
  which there is such abundance at home, but circumstances seem to
  render this inevitable.

  Repeating my regrets that I should have deluded you with false hopes,
  I am

                                 Yours faithfully,
                                                    T. K. CHAMBERS.”

It is pleasant to note that, if S. J.-B. failed to get from Dr. Chambers
the thing she wanted at the moment, she had at least found in him a
lifelong friend and helper.

It was well that she had decided for “baith, my lord.” She now once more
approached the University Court in the person of its President, the
Rector, asking whether they would remove their present veto in case
arrangements could be made for the instruction of women in separate
classes; and whether in that case women would be allowed to matriculate
in the usual way, and to undergo the ordinary examination, with a view
to obtaining medical degrees in due course.

She also wrote to the Senatus, asking them to recommend the
matriculation of women as medical students on the understanding that
separate classes should be formed: and she addressed a letter to the
Dean of the Medical Faculty offering on behalf of her fellow-students
and herself to guarantee whatever minimum fee the Faculty might fix as a
remuneration for these separate classes.

  “I appreciate your truly kind and thoughtful plans with regard to the
  pecuniary arrangements,” writes Miss Pechey in this connection. “I
  shall be sorry if my means will not allow me to take a full share of
  the expenses, but I am afraid I shall not be able to afford more than
  double the usual fees for a man.”

S. J.-B. had returned to Edinburgh in order to further arrangements, and
to meet any difficulties that might arise. The first thing to be done
was to secure teachers, and, now that it came to the point, some even of
those who had been most favourable showed a singular reluctance to take
the plunge. Their enthusiasm had had time to cool.

  “June 26th ... Today went to see A. Most disappointingly timorous,—
  ‘_could_ not give the extra time himself,’ though he did not refuse to
  see the importance and responsibility of the case. I _hope_ he will
  vote for me still.

  B. very disappointing,—very avaricious,—trying for the 100 guineas.

  Balfour, out.

  I very disheartened and weary....

  I _do_ fear failure now,—indeed it seems to me probable, in Medical
  Faculty.

  And then all the time and effort wasted since March 1st! A year’s
  steady work would have been less strain!...

  If one had but faith! Ought one not to say, ‘I fight and work my
  best,—God _will_ bring out the best result,—let me not prejudge what
  is best.’

  And so be content either way.”

  “June 30th. Christison has had to go to London,—wrathfully enough they
  say,—hurrah! I hear that he asked to have the day changed, and that
  Balfour refused,—the brick!

  Of course this adds to my chances.

  Also I had a long crack with Turner this morning. He did not speak
  against it as in his own person,—only evidently thought how awful it
  would be if ‘odium were thrown’ on two professors for refusing perhaps
  what others had granted. I suggested that it might perhaps be more
  awful to refuse all women for the sake of that.

  9 p.m. The 40 lines of Virgil written out [in preparation for the
  matriculation examination that as yet was a more than doubtful
  prospect], eyes and head weary. (Oh, dear, ‘it is not good for man to
  be alone.’)

  By this time tomorrow Medical Faculty at least decided.

  Thrown back utterly again? Today for the first time since Friday I
  hope a little. (Something of the Caliban in me says,—‘Unlucky to say
  so!’)”

  “July 1st. Yesterday O. H.’s ‘Two Poor Courts’ interested me much.

  7 p.m. Won after all!—and I do think this must be at last ‘the
  beginning of the end.’ For me 4 out of 6:—Balfour, Bennett, Spence,
  M‘Lagan. Turner would not vote dead against it, as Laycock wished, so
  those two did not vote, but Laycock ‘protested’....

  Allman absurdly wroth (to Masson) about canvassing and unjustifiable,
  etc., etc., seeming to mean that my poor little calls on people had
  interfered with their judicial wisdom.

  Just seen a letter from A. G. J.—I must hear that organ at Lucerne
  (with its storm, etc.) before I die.”

  “Friday, July 2nd.... 6 p.m. Hurrah!—The Senate granted my request
  without limitation and without division, though M‘Pherson tried to get
  up a motion for delay,—no one (not even Turner!) would second him.
  Turner wished to have it recorded that he ‘did not vote,’ but as no
  vote had to be taken this could not be, so he reluctantly had it
  recorded that he ‘dissented,’ which I regret, for I am sure that it is
  more than he wished.

  Present,—14. Grant, M‘Pherson, Lorimer, Masson, Wilson, Tait, Kelland,
  Craufurd, Liston, Stevenson, Balfour, Bennett, Spence, Turner.”

  “Monday. _The_ day! Even now (4.30 p.m.) a University of Britain may
  be literally open to women,—if so, won’t that have been worth doing?

  When I say to Alice, ‘The University Court may still stop it all,’—
  ‘They’d better not!’ quo’ she ferociously.”

What actually happened at the University Court this time is best related
in a letter to Dr. Lucy Sewall:

                                        “Maitland Street, Edinburgh.
                                               July 6th, 69.

  MY DARLING,

        You may address to me here for a fortnight after you get this,
  for I expect now to be here till about August 15th.

  The Medical Faculty and the Senatus have both voted in favour of
  special classes in the University for Women, and the University Court
  at their meeting yesterday passed a vote in favour of the measure. It
  seems however that there are some legal difficulties about the old
  Charter, etc., and that the matter will require the sanction of the
  Privy Council, which will cause delay, but I think no real
  difficulty,—for the Queen is known to be favourable to women doctors;
  and the present government is specially liberal. Indeed it has this
  real advantage that it will make the whole thing very public and very
  safe and permanent,—so that it will be almost impossible ever again to
  exclude women.

  So now I am looking forward to years of steady work here, and am so
  very glad to be able to do so!

  I am working at my Latin, etc., for the Matric. examination. It would
  astonish the women studying in Boston to see the examination that we
  have to pass here before we can even begin Medicine,—and it is a
  capital thing, because it will keep out ignorant and silly women to a
  great degree.... Oh, dear child, it is so nice to look forward to
  having you here next summer to see and know all about it. You will so
  enjoy Edinburgh. I have been thinking about taking rooms or a house
  lately, and I keep saying to myself, ‘You must have a room full of sun
  for my doctor!’ It _is_ so good to look forward to seeing you....

  Have you seen Mill’s Subjection of Women? Your Father would delight in
  it. I mean to send him a copy as a remembrance.

  I am very glad to see that the British Medical Journal encourages the
  opening of classes for women. I shall send you the number.

  I am only anxious now to have a good big class of women and of a
  creditable kind.... _How_ I wish that you would come and settle here!
  You could establish a Dispensary at once, and have all us students at
  your orders. We shall want sadly some teaching of that sort.... This
  climate would be so much better for you, and I should feel so much
  happier about you if you were here. I know if you are in Boston, I
  shall worry about you all winter....

  Well, Goodbye, my dear child! Whether you come or stay, all good be
  with you!

                                    Your very aff.
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

The reader will scarcely be surprised to learn that when on July 23rd
the University Court formally acceded to her petition, S. J.-B. was
almost too tired to feel elated, though she admits that she would be
“grieving bitterly had things been otherwise.” In addition to her other
work, she had spent a fortnight in the house of a very dear friend,
nursing several serious cases of scarlet fever. Trained nurses for
private houses were almost unknown in those days, and she did not spare
herself. On July 9th she had written to ask Mrs. Thorne—who was in
Aberdeen at the time—to join her in Edinburgh. “I _won’t_ take the whole
responsibility alone,”—the responsibility of engaging lecturers and
guaranteeing fees,—she confides to her diary. The grasshopper had become
a burden. Even the modest amount of Latin required for the Matriculation
Examination was a great effort to her, and she knew of old the
importance of husbanding her strength.

  “Most folk,” she says with great truth and pathos,—“or at least many,
  have only their indolence to strive with. If they conquer that, all
  serene. I (after that done) have to pause half way,—ware crash!—and to
  calculate nicely how much brain force I dare bring to bear or use up.

  Ah, well,—shall my strength be as my day,—or isn’t it fair to apply
  that to self-imposed work?”

“Self-imposed?” There is a big question involved here. No doubt the
readers of this book will answer it in different ways.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In any case she had achieved her task. Notwithstanding a direct
negative, moved by the Revd. Dr. Phin, the resolution of the University
Court was approved by the General Council on October 29th, 1869, and was
sanctioned by the Chancellor on November 12th. The following
regulations, drawn up by the Court, were officially issued at the same
date, and inserted in the _Calendar_ of the University:

  “(1.) Women shall be admitted to the study of medicine in the
  University; (2.) The instruction of women for the profession of
  medicine shall be conducted in separate classes, confined entirely to
  women; (3.) The Professors of the Faculty of Medicine shall, for this
  purpose, be permitted to have separate classes for women; (4.) Women,
  not intending to study medicine professionally, may be admitted to
  such of these classes, or to such part of the course of instruction
  given in such classes, as the University Court may from time to time
  think fit and approve; (5.) The fee for the full course of instruction
  in such classes shall be four guineas; but in the event of the number
  of students proposing to attend any such class being too small to
  provide a reasonable remuneration at that rate, it shall be in the
  power of the Professor to make arrangements for a higher fee, subject
  to the usual sanction of the University Court. (6.) All women
  attending such classes shall be subject to all the regulations now or
  at any future time in force in the University as to the matriculation
  of students, their attendance on classes, Examination or otherwise;
  (7.) The above regulations shall take effect as from the commencement
  of session 1869-70.”

This is how the “first British University”—the University of Edinburgh—
was thrown open to women.




                               CHAPTER VI
                          THE HOPE SCHOLARSHIP


The month of August brought some rest and refreshment, though S. J.-B.
remained in Edinburgh to “coach” for the Matriculation Examination. Mrs.
Burn Murdoch put her spacious and comfortable house for a little time at
the solitary student’s disposal, and, to S. J.-B.’s great joy, Miss Du
Pre came to visit her.

There were delightful excursions up the Forth, through the Trossachs,
and even farther afield, and S. J.-B. spent what is now known as a week-
end, at his country-place, with Mr. Findlay of the _Scotsman_, and his
wife. One realizes by many little indications how her views on the whole
question of women were becoming explicit. In the course of her visit,
her host showed her letters he had received from a clever American
woman—a journalist of sorts, apparently—in the course of which she asked
him to “help the little woman,” “the wee bit thing.” “When _will_ women
learn,” says S. J.-B., “if they claim to stand on common ground at all,
to ‘stand upright,’ to ask _only_ ‘fair field and no favour’!”

On October 10th she moved into No. 15 Buccleuch Place, “the house nice,
airy, wholesome, roomy,—rent, taxes and all probably £45,” and, on the
following day Miss Pechey lunched with her. A week later S. J.-B. sums
the new comrade up:

  “I think her strong, ready-handed, with ‘faculty,’ great ability,
  resolution, judgment; great calmness and quiet of manner and action,
  and probably strength of feeling; good taste, good manner; very
  pleasant face; rather good feet and hands; considerable sense of
  humour; lots of energy and interest in things,—witness dissecting the
  slugs, keeping caterpillars, etc. In fine, as good an ally and
  companion as could well be had.”

She had occasion to add considerably to this estimate as life went on,
but in no wise to subtract from it.

Meanwhile Mrs. Evans had resolved to throw in her lot with the little
band, and S. J.-B. was coaching her in Arithmetic. Miss Chaplin
(afterwards the wife of Professor Ayrton) had also joined their ranks,
and it was a gallant and creditable little phalanx that made its way up
to the University on October 19th to undergo the Matriculation
Examination.

Of course they all passed, and passed far above the average, though
there was one “narrow squeak” in Arithmetic. They were all cultivated
women, all on their mettle, and the result was scarcely more than might
reasonably have been anticipated. “We believe,—” as a local paper had
occasion to say, after a similar result some ten months later,

  “We believe that these results prove, not that women’s capacities are
  better than those of men,—a thing that few people would assert,—but
  that these women who are devoting themselves to obtain, in spite of
  all difficulties, a thorough knowledge of their profession, are far
  more thoroughly in earnest than most of the men are, and that their
  ultimate success is certain in proportion. Nor would we omit the
  inference that, this being so, those who wantonly throw obstacles in
  the way of this gallant little band, incur a proportionately heavy
  responsibility, as wanting not only in the spirit of chivalry, but
  even in the love of fair play, which we should be sorry to think
  wanting in any Briton.”[56]

Footnote 56:

  _Daily Review_, Aug. 5, 1870.

It was natural, however, that friends and well-wishers should be not a
little elated. Here is one of many delightful letters:

                                                     “Oct. 22, 1869.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        This is just one word of warmest congratulation from us both to
  you and the other ladies. We are rejoicing more than I can tell you
  over the results of the examination. I have been a prisoner today with
  a severe cold, or I should have been unable to rest until I had shaken
  hands with you. Shall you be at home any time tomorrow after one
  o’clock? If so, I shall like to come and see you and Miss Pechey.

  Do send me a line to tell me if you are as happy as I fancy you.

                            Yours faithfully,
                                                 E. ROSALINE MASSON.

  Mr. Masson was very much gratified by the papers of the ladies. They
  fully justified his highest hopes.”

From diary:

  “Tuesday, Nov. 2nd. ‘The deed—of life—was done!’—This morning, 11.30
  a.m., I, S. L. J.-B., first of all women, matriculated as ‘Civis
  Academiae Edinensis!’—Tonight for the first time 5 women are
  undergraduates!—Hurrah!

                     ‘With exactness grinds He all.’”

  “I do indeed congratulate you undergraduates with all my heart,” wrote
  Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, who had now settled in London. “It seems to
  me the grandest success that women have yet achieved in England; it is
  the great broad principle established that conducts to every noble
  progress.

  I feel as if I _must_ come up to Edinburgh in the course of the
  winter, to see and bless the class! Perhaps towards the close of the
  term would be best,—advise me.”

So began a winter’s work that for most, if not all, of the women
students, was an experience of extraordinary interest and happiness. S.
J.-B. and Edith Pechey had settled together in Buccleuch Place, and the
house was a _rendezvous_ for a choice little circle. It would be
difficult to say which of the two proved the greater attraction to their
friends. Miss Pechey was younger, more adaptable, less obviously
alarming, though possibly more critical really, in proportion as she had
seen less of life. The reader is already aware that S. J.-B., though a
most interesting person to live with, was not by any means always an
easy person to live with, particularly when she was overworked and
overstrained. For her friends as well as herself it was sometimes a
question—in her own significant words—of, “Ware crash!” Moreover,
although she often gave to others the advice,—“Glissez, mortels:
n’appuyez pas!”, she not infrequently failed to act on it herself: she
still, as when a child, staked her happiness too readily on matters that
might better have been regarded as trifles: and this is a characteristic
that becomes a more serious factor in domestic and social life as the
years go on. On the other hand, when she really “let herself go” in her
most intimate circle, there was no one like her. The diary and the
letters give scarcely an indication of the sense of humour and fun that
were so ready to bubble over into real whole-hearted laughter. The eyes
so familiar with sorrow could still sparkle with merriment like a
child’s, and, when anything struck her as irresistibly preposterous or
comical, she had a way of “tossing them up to the ceiling and catching
them again” that was a joy to behold. Increasingly as life went on, she
was a touchstone on which to test the things that might be said, the
stories that might be told. She could enjoy a joke that would have
shocked many women of her generation; but, as her Mother had said long
before, “anything impure ran off her mind like quicksilver,” and she was
a past master in the art of calling home a conversation that was
lingering too long in permissible bye-ways.

More than this,—even at the time of which we are writing, she was one of
those with whom people know instinctively that it is safe to speak, not
only of the great things of life, but of the disgraceful things, or the
small disconcerting things that want to be looked at in an atmosphere of
greatness. She was a Mother Confessor to many. “Now straight into the
fire!” she says in her diary of certain letters she had received; and
the smoke of that sacrifice meant something, for—born chronicler as she
was—it was pain and grief to her to destroy a letter at any time.

She was particularly happy that winter term. On the last night of the
year she writes in her diary:

  “11.30 p.m. The long tangle of accounts unravelled at last!—‘after
  long travail, good repose!’

  In more senses than one.

  Nine years since that look from the window,—‘And may the New Year
  cherish.’

  Since then I suppose no such (visibly) important year in my life. One
  very dear friend won,—one strong ally,—Edinburgh opened!—What if one
  _is_ a little tired? ‘After long travail good repose!’

  I see that a year ago I thought there were no hopes ‘now bright,’—and
  ‘an hour of joy I knew not was winging its silent flight.’ Indeed the
  next six months did cut out their own work.

  The year has been glorious in many ways.

  The chief point of pain....”

The chief point of pain was the fear that she was fickle,—that the new
interests and friendships were making her disloyal to the strange
unearthly friendship for Octavia Hill. Whether this would have been
blameworthy is a question that it is unnecessary to discuss, as the
contingency never arose. The flame may have flickered and sunk low, but
it continued to burn for another forty years. Then “after long travail
good repose.”

And in any case she was very happy that winter term. Strangely
enough,[57] her family were thoroughly sympathetic with her aims.
Discussing the volume of Essays to which she had contributed, her
brother wrote:

  “Miss Cobbe was very vigorous and suggestive: might have been longer.
  So might yours without any risk of the interest flagging; and more
  details of fact would (I think) have driven the nail deeper in the
  Philistine’s understanding.... I should say that Mrs. Butler’s and
  yours will hit the public hardest; most dissimilar as they are.... On
  the main question, for you personally, I am very glad that you are on
  the medical rails. They are real and solid and really lead somewhere.
  There is more specialty about them than in the somewhat vague
  educational line. They belong to an old strong well-paid profession.
  They tend to the alleviation of intense human misery; and that for a
  large class of delicate cases women when properly trained are the
  right physicians I have felt for years and feel increasingly. Stick to
  them head and hands and feet. Don’t be drawn aside into tempting but
  irrelevant bye-ways. You will be very useful and very happy in your
  work: and to have helped to bring about the result that for the years
  to come girls shall not be without the pale of professional and
  University education,—shall not waste their best years in chafing at
  want of elbow room at home—will be a great and additional
  satisfaction. Nothing succeeds like success, and what you have got to
  do is to prove that a Lady Physician can be trustworthy and a success.
  Do nothing but your work, and you will do your work well. Of course
  get hold of the widest and deepest Professional education within
  reach.

                              Your aff. brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

Footnote 57:

  “Strangely” when compared with the families of her contemporaries.
  “When I told Mamma I had got my certificate,” said a former fellow-
  student, “she said ‘Have you?’ When I told Uncle, he said ‘What good
  is it?’ When I told Emily, she said, ‘I am very glad to hear it, but I
  am very much surprised.’”

This last point, on which the writer touches so lightly, was precisely
the rub.

  “Everything is just as we would have it,” wrote S. J.-B. at this time
  to Dr. Sewall, “but that Professors are not _compelled_ to lecture to
  us. We have already arranged for two courses for this winter,—5
  lectures a week each,—Physiology and Chemistry; and we are now
  arranging for Anatomy, both in lectures and dissecting.

  As we have to make entirely separate arrangements, the Anatomy will be
  very expensive,—about £100 probably for us five,—and of this I shall
  pay about one-third, as two of the students are not at all rich.

  Still it is worth any money to get the thing done, and I am only
  thankful that I _can_ spend the money. Of course I borrow it from my
  Mother.[58] My fees for this year will be about £55 or £60,—about
  $400,—for the 6 months.

  I have made up my mind to spend if needful £1000 on this business. I
  feel sure that one does more good in thus concentrating one’s energies
  and one’s funds to get one thing done thoroughly, than in frittering
  away lots of small sums in charity,—Don’t you think so? It _is_ a
  grand thing to enter the very first British University ever opened to
  women, isn’t it?

  My darling, you _must_ come and see us this summer, for, as I tell the
  other students here, the whole thing is due to _you_ primarily;—when
  they say that they feel grateful to me for having worked for this, I
  say, ‘Thank Dr. Sewall,—she made me care for Medicine, and resolve
  that a _thorough_ education should be open to Englishwomen.’ So I told
  Dr. Blackwell too when she said something pretty to me. She is _very_
  pleased about Edinburgh.

  Well, dear child, I have settled down now for the winter in my little
  new house. It amuses me to hear of your expenses in furnishing. The
  _whole_ I have spent is under £35,—about $200,—and yet we are very
  comfortable!

  Miss Pechey is very nice and very clever,—you will like her very much,
  and she is excellent company....

  Our classes begin on Nov. 3rd. I am _very_ busy till then.

                                       Your very aff.
                                                        S. L. J.-B.”

Footnote 58:

  Money borrowed from Mrs. Jex-Blake was refunded as strictly as if it
  had been borrowed from a banker.

Busy indeed she was with the great task of finding lecturers. The
University of Edinburgh still stood foursquare, and the Professors sat
in their comfortable chairs, lecturing to enormous classes of male
students. Looking at the question as a sheer matter of business, one
asks what inducement had these men to lecture to a handful of women
students? S. J.-B., Mrs. Thorne and the others might struggle and pinch
to raise the fees of a dozen or more, but what was that to men of
assured wealth and position?—men who looked upon a Scots professorship
as the topmost rung on the ladder of comfortable success,—men to whom
leisure and peace seemed almost a matter of right, an essential part of
the prize they had drawn in the lottery of life? Why should they double
their work for the sake of this paltry pittance? It was not to be
expected that they should have a great enthusiasm for the cause. How
could they? They might, it is true, have been possessed of a high sense
of the trust conferred on them by their position: but is such a sense in
any sphere of life the possession of more than the choicest few?

As regarded the class in Chemistry, everything had gone with delightful
smoothness. On July 10th, S. J.-B. had written in her diary, “Dr. Crum
Brown agrees,—not a word of demur as to fees,—good fellow,” and a few
days later she had received a letter from Dresden in which he said:

  “I am convinced that the experiment must be made, and do not wish to
  place any unnecessary obstacles in the way. I therefore cordially
  agree to your proposal, on the understanding that the consent of the
  University Court is obtained, and that the course be conducted in the
  Chemical Class-room of the University, and be in all respects the same
  as the ordinary course of Chemistry.”

So far as the work was concerned, one is glad to think that his
generosity met with its reward. All the teacher in him must have
rejoiced in the mettle of the new students. Miss Pechey, in particular,
simply fell upon Chemistry and proceeded to make it her own. In the
house of which the furnishing had cost £35, she and S. J.-B. rigged up
some kind of laboratory, and carried on experiments with a keenness that
to the stern advocate of “limited liability” might well have endangered
their success in class examinations.

When the winter session came to an end in March, however, it was found
that Miss Pechey stood third in the entire list, and was really first of
the first-year students,—two of the men having attended the class
before. There would have been nothing calamitous in this state of
affairs, had it not chanced that there were certain small scholarships
involved. A previous Professor of Chemistry in the University—Dr. Hope—
had made the experiment of delivering a course of lectures to ladies,
and had devoted the proceeds—amounting to about £1000—to the founding of
four Hope Scholarships, which entitled the winners to the free use of
the College Laboratory. What this privilege would have meant to a born
student like Miss Pechey one can easily imagine, but, as mixed classes
were forbidden, there might have been a difficulty—scarcely
insurmountable—about her making full use of it.

Hitherto, as we have seen, the Professor had treated the women
generously. We know that he bore them no grudge; and it is absurd to
suppose that he had any wish to be unjust to an engaging, deft-handed
girl, with a calm strong face, and a brain which he must have already
seen to be far above the average in either sex,—a girl, moreover, who
was frankly appreciative of her good fortune in having so able a man as
her teacher.

One can only conjecture the motives and the advice that must have
influenced him in the decision to withhold even the name of Hope Scholar
from this woman, and to give it to the man who stood beneath her on the
list. In explaining his position, the Professor said that, having
studied at a different hour, she was not a member of the Chemistry
Class; but at the same time he awarded to her the official bronze medal
of the University, to which she could only lay claim as a member of that
class; and, in the published list of honours, he put her name and those
of the other women in the place to which their marks entitled them.

It was a clumsy though well-meaning compromise, and only led to greater
difficulties farther on. Having said that the women were not members of
the Chemistry Class, how could he give them certificates of attendance
on that class? It was obviously impossible, so he offered them written
certificates of having attended “a ladies’ class in the University,”—
certificates absolutely worthless from the point of view of professional
examination. One is reminded of the strawberry jam labels which Mark
Twain offered to the conductor of a continental railway when his ticket
was worn out; but, unfortunately, the Registrar of a great University is
not to be appeased with strawberry jam labels.

In truth the Professor had done the cause an incalculable service. A
howl of indignation went up over the whole country. The _Times_, the
_Spectator_,—a faithful supporter from the first,—even the _British
Medical Journal_, were genuinely roused. The Universities and the
Profession had been governed by a spirit of Conservatism, of Trades-
unionism, of which this was but a mild example; but now at last that
spirit had become explicit: here was the priceless desideratum of the
tangible grievance: and it was just like life—just the irony of fate—
that the man who provoked the outburst, the man who had to suffer, was
not one of the bitter opponents: he was, in his own way, the friend and
helper of the struggling cause. He had taught the women Chemistry, and
he had taught them well; and that was the main thing, even though a
bronze medal, and a few “strawberry jam labels” were—for five people in
deadly earnest—to be the only outward and visible signs of six months’
hard work.

The matter was referred to the Senatus, who decided by a majority of one
that Miss Pechey was not entitled to the Hope Scholarship, and (on the
motion of Professor P. G. Tait) also by a majority of one, that the
women should have the ordinary class certificates. So the women grasped
the substance, if they did lose the shadow.

  “I agree with you that the one vote stultifies the other,” wrote
  Professor Masson, “and I think people are seeing this. At the time I
  made up my mind that the first vote must carry the other unfavourably
  with it; but it was not for me to keep the Senatus consistent, and,
  when Tait announced his view, I grasped at the unexpected accident and
  seconded his motion.”

But the outcry was not stilled. In those days the general public knew
little of the difference between one certificate and another; but they
had some idea of what was meant by the losing of a scholarship, and Miss
Pechey became the recipient of an amount of condolence that was
positively embarrassing when compared with the extent of the injury
inflicted. The skilled appreciation of the situation, however, was
delightful. This was the tribute of the _British Medical Journal_:

  “Whatever may be our views regarding the desirability of ladies
  studying medicine, the University of Edinburgh professed to open its
  gates to them on equal terms with the other students; and, unless some
  better excuse be forthcoming in explanation of the decision of the
  Senatus, we cannot help thinking that the University has done no less
  an injustice to itself than to one of its most distinguished
  students.”[59]

One can imagine the effect of criticism such as this on some of the
professors. Here was a tiresome muddle from which it was difficult to
see a dignified exit. What wonder if many took the cheap and obvious
course of exclaiming, “The _woman_ that Thou gavest me!—she is at the
bottom of it all?” So far as the explanation went, it was perfectly
true: and of course only a few of the pundits saw today with the eyes of
tomorrow; only a few realized that the difficulty that was worrying them
was a part of a world-wide upheaval involving the whole human race.

Of course there were those who, without taking any extreme view, were
admirably sane and dignified. Instance the following letter from
Professor Fleeming Jenkin:

                                                   “April 5th, 1870.

  DEAR MADAM,

        I regret that I shall be unavoidably absent on Saturday next,
  or, as far as might have been possible, I should have supported Miss
  Pechey’s claims.

  I regret my absence the less, however, as it seems to me that the
  legal question of a particular reward is of far less consequence than
  the fact of the position which you and Miss Pechey have taken in the
  class.

  Accept my very hearty congratulations and

                                  Believe me,
                                        Yours truly,
                                                    FLEEMING JENKIN.

  Miss Jex-Blake.”

Footnote 59:

  _Brit. Med. Journal_, April 16th, 1870.

There was a question of referring the matter to the University Court,
but one is glad to think that wiser counsels prevailed. Miss Pechey had
gone to her home in the country, and was listening to the nightingales.

  “Thank you for Masson’s letter,” she writes to S. J.-B. “He is a grand
  fellow. Wilson has sent me the minutes of the Senatus meeting about
  the scholarship. I suppose I ought to write to him. I wish you were
  here to tell me what to do.

  You understand that I leave you to do as is thought best about the
  scholarship,—only remember that my own judgment—apart from personal
  feeling—is against appealing, and that I do not wish to do so unless
  our friends are very decisively of opinion that we ought to.”

Well might Miss Pechey say, “He is a grand fellow.” Professor Masson had
taken up the cause of the woman as wholeheartedly as if it had been a
matter of vital import to himself. At the next meeting of the General
Council of the University, he moved (seconded by Professor Balfour)
that, instead of having separate instruction, women should be admitted
to the ordinary classes of the University. The original draft of the
motion was as follows:

  “That, as the present arrangements for the medical instruction of
  women in the University impose great and unnecessary inconveniences on
  the women who are students, and also on Professors, and may, if
  continued, even nullify the resolution of the University admitting
  women to the study of medicine [and as it will not be to the credit of
  the University that it should pretend to do a thing and not do
  it],[60] the General Council recommend to the University Court that
  women desiring to study medicine be admitted to the medical classes as
  other students are, and on the same terms, except in cases where the
  Court may see special reasons why the instruction should be separate.”

  “The motion is longish,” he says, “but I thought it well to have
  something which, when printed, would explain itself and attract
  attention of members of Council.... I am the more convinced that we do
  right in moving the General Council as above, even if we should lose,
  because I distinctly perceive a relapse on the part of those who had
  merely acquiesced, and a kind of exulting feeling on the part of
  others that the experience of the session may be pleaded in proof that
  the University perpetrated a troublous blunder when it admitted Eve’s
  sex at all. This state of feeling will be but temporary; but it is
  time that the opposed forces should meet in full conflict on the
  mixed-classes question.”

Footnote 60:

  The words in brackets were omitted from the resolution, but introduced
  in the speech supporting it.

“Full conflict,” indeed, it proved. The opponents brought forward
arguments that called forth an indignant interruption from the Professor
of Moral Philosophy (Dr. Calderwood); and the _Times_, while
disapproving of mixed classes, stated in a leading article:

  “We cannot sufficiently express the indignation with which we read
  such language, and we must say that it is the strongest argument
  against the admission of young ladies to the Edinburgh medical
  classes, that they would attend the lectures of Professors capable of
  talking in this strain.”[61]

The motion was lost by 47 votes to 58.

  “No speaking on our side could have changed the vote,” wrote Professor
  Masson, “those present were all predetermined. Crum Brown did well,
  and administered a proper reproof to L. Struthers was present and
  voted with us; so did Nicolson (who was quite in earnest when the time
  came), and Dr. Craufurd, who avows himself a convert. On the other
  hand, Wilson, Bennett, Charteris and Tait, of our side, were absent,
  reducing our number somewhat. People today are consoling me—for I was
  really downcast—by saying the result was a success in its kind, and an
  omen of final success when the thing comes up again, as it must. All
  very well; but how shall I console _you_? What are _you_ to do this
  year? The only thing I disliked in Crum Brown’s speech was his opening
  statement that he thought the motion perhaps premature, the time not
  having elapsed for the experiment of the other method. Premature! This
  in face of his own refusal to continue, and in face of his subsequent
  declaration that the existing method is impracticable! Still he said
  and did well. What shall I say but that my heart is sore for your
  immediate discomfiture? Time—a year or two—will rectify the thing
  generally, here and elsewhere; but how you are to get on with us is
  the question. Christison, who draws Turner, Lister, and Sanders (L. is
  nothing) with him, seems determined to get rid of you, and trusts to
  effecting this by mere continuance of the present arrangement. Whether
  you can wriggle on with us by any ingenuity in the hope of beating him
  is for your consideration. Would it might be so!

                                  Ever yours truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

Footnote 61:

  The _Times_, April 25th, 1870.

The view that the result of the motion was a success in its kind proved
to be a general one, and the matter was discussed at great length by
newspapers, lay, medical and religious.

  “There is no possible reason,” said the _Guardian_,[62] “why a very
  large proportion of instruction may not be given with perfect
  propriety to men and women together; but there are clearly some parts
  in a medical course which cannot be so treated, and there ought to be
  no difficulty whatever in making arrangements for these. To provide
  separate lectures for a few special occasions is a very different
  thing, both in the matter of convenience and expense, from insisting
  on having two distinct and separate courses throughout in every
  department.... Professor Masson’s motion was defeated, but by a
  majority so small—eleven in a meeting of a hundred and five—that its
  success at some future time seems certain. Let the ladies only add to
  the exercise of one quality, with which the world credits them, that
  of patience, another, which is supposed to be a less common attribute
  of their sex, perseverance, and they will assuredly gain their point.”

  “The female students almost deserve this rebuff,” said the
  _Spectator_,[63] “for making the concessions they have done to English
  prudery, concessions not made either in France, Austria, or the United
  States. The only safe ground for them to stand on is that science is
  of no sex, and cannot be indelicate unless made so of _malice
  prepense_, and that by the very conditions of the profession the
  modesty of ignorance must be replaced by the modesty of pure intent.”

Footnote 62:

  April 27th, 1870.

Footnote 63:

  April 23rd, 1870.

It is not to be supposed that the women students were fortified by a
unanimous chorus of journalistic support: far from it: some six or seven
months later the _Spectator_ strove to understand “the bitter and, so
far as we know, the unprecedented malignity with which women who aspire
to be Doctors are pursued by the literary class.”

One does not wish to dwell on this. It was simply bound to be. As Sir
James Stansfeld said seven years later in reviewing the whole movement:

  “It is one of the lessons of human progress that when the time for a
  reform has come you cannot resist it, though, if you make the attempt,
  what you may do is to widen its character or precipitate its advent.
  Opponents, when the time has come, are not merely dragged at the
  chariot wheels of progress—they help to turn them. The strongest
  force, whichever way it seem to work, does most to aid.”

It is the more pleasing, however, to record the sane and wholesome view
taken from the first by the leading responsible papers, including
_Punch_.

  “I am very vexed about the General Council,” wrote Miss Pechey from
  her home; “but it’s no use worrying,—at least so the nightingale tells
  me. She sang two hours at my bedroom window last night, and said all
  sorts of pretty things. I wish I could bring her to Edinburgh with me,
  but she wouldn’t like it; besides they are a very old family, and have
  lived in the place from the time of the Britons, so she wouldn’t like
  to move.

  Papa did not write to the _Scotsman_. I knew he wouldn’t unless
  someone told him what to say; and I believe, if the truth were told,
  he still has some lurking prejudice against mixed classes. He isn’t a
  bit scientific, never notices the butterflies and beetles in a walk
  unless I point them out to him, and there are lovely ones now,
  peacocks and brimstones and tortoiseshells.”

It is clear that just then Miss Pechey was having a very good time. She
was the woman of the moment, a lion abroad as well as in her country
home, and she had the courage and the sense to enjoy the position
quietly and without making a fuss. Moreover both she and S.J.-B. were
human enough to appreciate the situation all the more because, from the
ordinary point of view, the heroine was a truly pretty girl, as
disarming as heroine well could be.




                              CHAPTER VII
                         PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES




Perseverance—“wriggling on”—was thus the course recommended to the women
by stranger and friend alike.

The Professor of Botany (Dr. Balfour, formerly Dean of the Faculty of
Medicine) who had wished to admit them to his ordinary class, made
arrangements to teach them separately. Professor Allmann also had
declared his willingness to admit S. J.-B. to his class of Natural
History (see p. 234) but he did not feel able to follow the generous
example of his colleague in devoting special time and energy to the
purpose. Fortunately the women had a second string to their bow in the
person of Dr. Alleyne Nicholson, lecturer in the Extra-Mural School,[64]
and their application to him called forth a letter which shows what the
difficulties were which even a kindly and open-minded man had to face.

Footnote 64:

  Appendix D.

                                                  “April 26th. 1870.

  DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        I have not as yet succeeded in obtaining a positive assurance as
  to the legality of my admitting you to my ordinary class, though I no
  longer entertain any doubt as to my perfect freedom in the matter, so
  far as the University is concerned. I have, however, consulted several
  of my colleagues, and they are tolerably unanimous in advising me to
  submit the question to my class.... They advise me, namely, not to
  commence abruptly on Monday without any warning, but to give my
  opening lecture separately, to my ordinary class at one o’clock, and
  to you at 2 p.m. At the conclusion of the hour I should explain to the
  students how matters stand, and should ask their permission to make
  over to you a bench in the general class. This is the advice which is
  given me, and I have no doubt as to its wisdom.

  I am fully aware that this will not be nearly so satisfactory to you
  as unconditional permission on my part; and I must beg you to believe
  that it is in many respects far from being so satisfactory to my own
  feelings in the matter. If I were a thoroughly independent man I can
  assure you that I should not be deterred from doing what I thought
  right in this question by any fear of the consequences. As things
  really stand, however, I do not feel justified in running the risk of
  losing my ordinary class in whole or in part, as I am assured I should
  do if I were to attempt to introduce this innovation wholly without
  warning. If I _knew_ my class, if I had the opportunity of even two or
  three days’ acquaintance with them, I think I should have little to
  apprehend as to their behaviour on any such question as this. You will
  remember, however, that I am dealing with an unknown quantity in
  making up my mind as to the course I shall adopt; and that I am wholly
  without adequate data to guide me in my determination.... My present
  opinion is that whilst I have every wish to admit you to my general
  class, it will be safest for me to submit the question to my class and
  to abide by a decision of the majority.”

Apparently S. J.-B. obtained a verbal, but satisfactory, modification of
this programme by suggesting that the class should be asked “to unite
with the lecturer in inviting” the women to join them, but that was a
mere matter of detail. Everything depended on the way in which Dr.
Nicholson stated the case, and one is not surprised to hear that the
favourable reply came not from a majority, but from the entire class.
“So,” says S. J.-B., “the first ‘mixed-class’ was inaugurated and
continued throughout the summer without the slightest inconvenience.”

  “The course of lectures on Zoology which I am now delivering to a
  mixed class,” wrote Dr. Nicholson later in answer to a mistaken
  statement in a medical paper, “is identically the same as the course
  which I delivered last winter to my ordinary class of male students. I
  have not hitherto emasculated my lectures in any way whatever, nor
  have I the smallest intention of so doing. In so acting, I am guided
  by the firm conviction that little stress is to be laid on the purity
  and modesty of those who find themselves able to extract food for
  improper feelings from such a purely scientific subject as Zoology,
  however freely handled.”

This was all very well, but the classes so far obtained were mere
outposts. The real Giant Difficulty lay with Anatomy and Clinical
teaching, and that session’s work was complicated, for S. J.-B. in
particular, by a constant undercurrent of effort to obtain the necessary
teaching. It was essential that the teacher, if not a Professor, should
at least be recognized by the University, and there were representatives
of the University who were not desirous to make the matter easy. Over
and over again hopes were raised, only to be disappointed: on one
occasion the lecturer, after much parleying, had actually agreed to do
the work and had accepted his fee; but, even at that late stage, he
backed out and returned the fee with an apology. (“_How_ vexed I was!”
says S. J.-B., “thoroughly upset and nervous.”) It happened repeatedly,
too, that the men who would have liked to help had already on some other
question taken up a position unpopular with their more conservative
_confrères_, and simply dared not espouse another fighting cause.

S. J.-B. was urged to go to Zürich and fit herself to teach Anatomy; but
what assurance had she—what encouragement had she even to hope—that the
University would recognize her teaching on her return? And what were the
other students—a growing number—to do in the meantime? Try their fortune
elsewhere?—and brave the inevitable, “Lo, these who have turned the
world upside down are come hither also”?

Once and again some chivalrous man took up their cause, refusing to
believe that the difficulty was real; but little by little he was apt to
find that the intangible mist of opposition was as impervious as an iron
wall.

It was due to Dr. Arthur Gamgee that Dr. Handyside finally agreed to
admit the women to his ordinary Anatomy class and dissecting-room at
Surgeons’ Hall, provided the other lecturers made no objection: and, so
far the arrangements for the following winter session were made.

  “Saturday, [June] 25th. Called on Dr. Watson[65] (Surgery). He signed
  my petition readily. Thought if _we_ made no difficulty, no one ought
  to about mixed classes,—anyone in earnest in his subject should be
  able to teach all students. Of course the teacher should put his foot
  down,—the students followed a beck,—and, if invited, would of course
  make a row, etc....

  Saw Keiller too.... Was quite favourable as to Handyside and mixed
  classes;—he himself having had students and midwives....”

Footnote 65:

  Afterwards Sir Patrick Heron Watson.

The question of these mixed classes in the Extra-Mural School was
technically an infringement of Regulation 2 in the _Calendar_ (see p.
260), and in this connection it was duly brought before the Senatus of
the University, with the proposal to refer the matter to the University
Court; but Professor Bennett moved, seconded by Professor Tait, “that
the Senatus see no reason to interfere.” This amendment appears to have
been carried by the casting vote of the Principal.

“So that’s settled,” says S. J.-B.

“_How_ fast events go! I really hope for mixed classes in the University
before 1871.”

She forgot to allow sufficiently for the fighting force of a large
minority, led by an angry few.

Meanwhile that wonderful Mother was following the struggle, not indeed
with the minute study Miss Du Pre was giving to the question, but with
the old unfailing sympathy. Like Miss Pechey’s father, she had been
rather staggered at first at the thought of mixed classes, but shortly
after this she writes:

  “DARLING,

        I don’t now at all object to mixed classes. As the teaching must
  at present be given _by men_, I don’t see why there should not be
  mixed classes to listen: and I feel confident if you continue to have
  such a nice set of women, the tone of the young men generally will be
  greatly raised. If mixed classes answer so well at Zurich and Paris,
  why not here?—but I confess to great ignorance.”

Intellectually, the supply of women showed no sign of falling short.
With the advice and coöperation of Miss Garrett, Lady Amberley had
offered a scholarship for competition at the October Matriculation
Examination, and S. J.-B. proudly jots down the verdict of the examiners
on their work:

  “‘Miss Barker’s Logic paper best ever had from medical students.’

  ‘Miss Bovell’s French best in University except one Frenchman’s.’

  ‘Miss Walker had the _only_ 100 per cent. in Mathematics.’

  Classical examiner wrote,—‘I was very much struck with the accuracy as
  well as elegance of some papers.‘”

Of course a woman—or a man for that matter—may pass a brilliant
examination in Mathematics or Chemistry, and yet be unable to keep her
head at a difficult midwifery case; and it was perfectly right and
fitting that men doctors should recognize and even emphasize this fact.
One would not have wished them to do otherwise. It was fortunate for the
women, however, that their opponents were apt to state their case with a
conspicuous want of any sense of humour, as the following letter from
the _Lancet_[66] sufficiently exemplifies:

  “SIR,—In all popular movements, however one-sided and irrational they
  may seem, there is some foundation of truth, the grain of common sense
  in the bushel of chaff. And so it is with the movement that is now
  taking place with respect to the admission of women into the rank of
  medical practitioners. I believe most conscientiously and thoroughly
  that as a body they are sexually, constitutionally, and mentally
  unfitted for the hard and incessant toil, and for the heavy
  responsibilities of general medical and surgical practice. At the same
  time I believe as thoroughly, that there is a branch of our
  profession—midwifery—to which they might and ought to be admitted in a
  subordinate position as a rule.

  In France, and in many other parts of the Continent, this division of
  labour in Midwifery is fully carried out, and with great advantage to
  both parties—to the regular practitioner, who is relieved of part of
  his most arduous, most wearing and most unremunerative duties, and to
  the women who have a vocation for medicine, who are able, thus, in
  large numbers, to gain a respectable living in the profession they
  wish to practise.

  I think I may safely say that there are very few medical men who have
  been ten years in practice, who would not gladly, thankfully, hand
  over to a body of well-educated and friendly midwifes their half-
  guinea or guinea midwifery cases. To a young practitioner there is the
  charm of novelty, and the desire to improve, which make remuneration
  altogether a secondary consideration. But after ten years‘ practice,
  often long before, a very decided change comes over the spirit of the
  dream.”

Footnote 66:

  June 18th, 1870.

The part of the letter that follows is perhaps too technical for
quotation; but the writer continues on the general question:

  “I would add in conclusion that, given women of exceptional energy,
  capacity, and intelligence, nothing would be easier than for them, if
  deserving, to rise out of the midwifery ranks into a wider sphere of
  activity and worldly success. Let them show by their energy, by their
  writing, by their contributions to the progress of medical science,
  that they had exceptional powers of observation and intellect, and
  fame would soon reach them. It has reached the very few women, who,
  like Mrs. Somerville, have given evidence not only of mere ability and
  talent, but higher powers, the power to grasp the more recondite and
  abstruse teachings of science. But even this power—the power to master
  and understand the existing state of science—does not constitute the
  characteristic feature of the male mind in the Caucasian race. The
  principal feature which appears to me to characterise the Caucasian
  race, to raise it immeasurably above all other races, is the power
  that many of its _male_ members have of advancing the horizon of
  science, of penetrating beyond the existing limits of knowledge—in a
  word, the power of scientific discovery. I am not aware that the
  female members of our race participate in this power, in this supreme
  development of the human mind; at least I know of no great discovery
  changing the surface of science that owes its existence to a woman of
  our or of any race. What right then have women to claim mental
  _equality_ with men?

  That woman may attain an honourable social position and pecuniary
  independence in our ranks in the position I point out, is proved by a
  case that came under my observation last year. A German lady M.D. in a
  German University, called on me on her way home from San Francisco.
  She told me that she had been practising there as an accoucheur and a
  ladies‘ and child’s doctor for twenty years, had gained a small
  fortune, and was returning to Germany to live and die in quiet. Her
  history was this: Early in married life her husband lost his fortune
  and became a confirmed invalid. She had thus her husband and two
  children to support. She studied midwifery and medicine, took a
  degree, and then went to America, settling at San Francisco. There she
  placed herself in a subordinate position to the medical men, acting
  with them, under them, and consequently supported by them. She had
  thus lived harmoniously with her professional brethren, and had had a
  career of uninterrupted professional success.

                        I remain, Sir, your obedient servant,
                                             HENRY BENNET, M.D.”[67]

Footnote 67:

  Not to be confused with Dr. Hughes Bennett, who had lectured to the
  women on Physiology.

One can imagine the somewhat grim smile with which this lucubration was
passed round the little band in Edinburgh: and it is only fair to say
that many of their opponents would have been glad to cry:—“_Non tali
auxilio, nec defensoribus istis!_” The _Lancet_ was not the advocate of
the women students in those days, and one is glad to record that the
Editor allowed S. J.-B. the opportunity to reply. Her letter is a fair
sample of the style of writing that was becoming habitual to her,—
translucently clear, concise and businesslike,—absolutely shorn of the
picturesqueness that had characterized the writing of her youth.

  “SIR,—I see in your columns of June 1st, 1870, a letter on ‘Women as
  Practitioners of Midwifery,’ and appeal to your sense of fairness to
  allow me a fourth part of the space it occupied for a few words in
  reply.

  It is hardly worth while to discuss the early part of the letter, as
  the second paragraph sufficiently disposes of the first. After saying
  that women are ‘sexually, constitutionally, and mentally unfitted for
  hard and incessant toil,’ Dr. Bennet goes on to propose to make over
  to them as their sole share of the medical profession what he himself
  well describes as its ‘most arduous, most wearing and most
  unremunerative duties.’ In the last adjective seems to lie the whole
  suitability of the division of labour according to the writer’s view.
  He evidently thinks that women’s capabilities are nicely graduated to
  fit _half-guinea_ or _guinea_ midwifery cases,‘ and that all patients
  paying a larger sum of necessity need the superior powers of the
  ‘_male_ mind of the Caucasian race.’ Let whatever is well paid be left
  to the man; then chivalrously abandon the ‘badly remunerated’ work to
  the women. This is the genuine view of a trades-unionist. It is well
  for once to see it candidly stated. As I trust the majority of medical
  men would be ashamed of avowing such a principle, and as I am sure it
  would be indignantly disallowed by the general public, I do not care
  to say more on this point.

  But when Dr. Bennet proceeds to dogmatise about what he calls our
  claim to ‘mental equality,’ he comes to a different and much more
  important question. I for one do not care in the least either to claim
  or disown such equality, nor do I see that it is at all essential to
  the real question at issue. Allow me to state in a few words the
  position that I and, as I believe, most of my fellow-students take. We
  say to the authorities of the medical profession,—‘State clearly what
  attainments you consider necessary for a medical practitioner; fix
  your standard where you please, but define it plainly; put no
  obstacles in our way; either afford us access to the ordinary means of
  medical education, or do not exact that we shall use your special
  methods; in either case subject us ultimately to exactly the ordinary
  examinations and tests, and, if we fail to acquit ourselves as well as
  your average students, reject us; if, on the contrary, in spite of all
  difficulties, we reach your standard, and fulfil all your
  requirements, the question of ‘mental equality’ is practically
  settled, so far as it concerns our case; give us then the ordinary
  medical licence or diploma, and leave the question of our ultimate
  success or failure in practice to be decided by ourselves and the
  public.’ This is our position, and I appeal, not to the chivalry, but
  to the justice of the medical profession, to show us that it is
  untenable, or else to concede it at once.

                        I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
                                                   SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.


  Edinburgh, June 21st.”[68]

Footnote 68:

  _Lancet_, July 9, 1870.

Nothing conciliatory here: no appeal for help for “the wee bit thing,”—
the appeal that some men in those days used to find so disarming:
nothing even in the spirit of the “Now remember, Daddy dear,” of those
delightful controversial letters of her girlhood. It is a fair field and
no favour with a vengeance now.

Possibly she might have shortened the battle if she had adopted a more
conciliatory attitude. One might say the same of many of the martyrs.
Had she done so, it would have meant a smaller battle,—a victory far
more limited in its results. If a new move is being effectively made, it
is almost always overdone. That is in the scheme of things. If there
were not faults on both sides, there would be no dramatic action,—no
“story”; and the world would go on its sleepy way, and pay no attention.
“Individuals, feeling strongly, while on the one hand they are
incidentally faulty in mode or language, are still peculiarly
_effective_.... The very faults of an individual excite attention; he
loses, but his cause (if good, and he powerful-minded) gains. This is
the way of things; we promote truth by a self-sacrifice.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Here then were the opposing forces, duly ranged against each other. One
can almost imagine the move and countermove that were bound to ensue.
And we must not forget the element furnished by the great mass of the
students—though there were “individuals” here, too, of course—on the
look out for mischief and fun, rejoicing in a row, ready “to follow a
beck” as that wise Heron Watson had said.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                       THE RIOT AT SURGEONS’ HALL


S. J.-B.’s medical experience in America had consisted mainly of
practical hospital work, and that chiefly in connection with the special
diseases of women. She had done a little dissecting in a rough and ready
way, and the privilege of what she then considered “real teaching” had
just been put within her reach when she was called home by the illness
of her father. She had this advantage, however, over her fellow-
students,—she knew that the “horrors” of the dissecting-room have only
to be faced in a spirit of serious intention in order to be dispelled.
She knew by experience that one _must_ pull oneself together in the
first instance for fear of doing irreparable damage to the dainty
structures that lie almost as cunningly hidden in surrounding tissue as
the future statue lies in the block of marble; and she knew that, little
by little, the privilege of laying bare that marvellous “handiwork”
becomes so enthralling as to make the earnest student oblivious to
everything else.

The Anatomy Class began formally in November, but the rooms were open
and teachers present from the beginning of October, for those who cared
to attend; so the women had the advantage of meeting in the first
instance only the keener of the students, or at least those who were
working with a special object in view. The women would gladly have had a
separate room, had this been available, but in their quiet corner they
worked away steadily, forgetful of all beyond. And everything went well.
Never, the lecturer said, had better work been done in his class-rooms.

Meanwhile influential friends were doing what in them lay to forward the
interests of the women in other quarters; for it must be remembered
that, as matriculated students of the University they ought not to have
been _compelled_ to study in Extra-Mural classes, and indeed it was only
a limited number of such classes that would be accepted for the
University degree. On October 28th a motion was brought forward in the
General Council of the University in favour of affording farther
facilities to the lady students. The motion was met by a direct
negative, Professor Christison asserting in the course of his speech
that Her Majesty Queen Victoria had expressed her concurrence in the
views that had been put forth on a previous occasion by Dr. Laycock and
himself. If there was any truth in this, one can only speculate as to
the form in which the story had reached Her Majesty’s ears,—certainly
not through the medium of a leading article in the _Times_. What weight
her reported opinion may have carried it is impossible to say, but, in
any case, when put to the vote, the negative was carried by 47 to 46.

(“Well, try again next year!” says S. J.-B.)

In reading the whole story, one is struck over and over again by the
narrowness of the majority by which things were turned. Great is the
responsibility of the weak and cowardly, the lazy and double-minded,—the
“unstable” who call themselves impartial.

At this stage, wisely or not, the women were advised to apply for
permission to work in the wards of the Royal Infirmary. This was the
only hospital in Edinburgh large enough to fulfil the requirements of
the General Medical Council for registration as a medical practitioner,
and the women were entitled to the privilege in virtue of their
Matriculation tickets. They knew that some of the doctors were in their
favour. Here are two of the “thumb-nail sketches” from the diary:

  “Saturday, Oct. 29th. Dr. Watson,—most friendly. Only too happy to
  have us as pupils. Could not anticipate difficulty about Infirmary,
  etc....

  Dr. Littlejohn foresaw the ruin of his son by women doctors, but
  ‘would drink the bitter cup to its dregs,’ and vote for us.”

Their request, however, was met by a curt refusal.

  “Monday, October 31st. Refused us dead.

  Gordon says, ‘Try a written memorial!’ Wood says he believes their
  charter compels them to admit all medical students.

  Qui vivra verra.”

It is obvious that they had approached the very stronghold of the enemy.
Might is right and possession nine points of the law. The matter lay in
the hands of a body of Managers who were obviously judging the case as
represented to them by the medical party in power; so now the duty fell
upon the women of explaining their position as far as possible to those
in whose hands the decision lay.

  “Friday, Nov. 4th. Just put down this day’s work for a specimen!
  Studying and canvassing at once,—

  8.45. Started for Surgeons’ Hall.

  9-10. Tutorial class, bones.

  10-11. Surgery lecture.

  11-1. Dissecting.

  1-2. Anatomy Lecture.

  2.10 Reached home and found a letter from Mr. Blyth (Manager) telling
  me to meet him at 2 p.m.!! Got there (after bolting beef-tea and wine)
  at 2.45. Talked at him for nearly an hour with good results, I
  believe. Got back home 3.40. Bolted some food, and went

  4 p.m. Demonstration exam. Didn’t know the Acromion but got 13/20
  marks.

  Home to dinner.

  7 p.m. Started on round of calls.

  Home at 10 p.m. Not tired,—oh, dear no!”

  “I _don’t_ like you to be a perpetual battering ram,” writes Miss Du
  Pre, “for I suppose battering rams do wear out after a good many
  sieges; but still I thoroughly like and admire your ‘never say die’
  feeling, and it _is_ a fight with something worth fighting for to be
  got at the end, which is a great thing.

  If only I could be with you!”

One must read the following letters, which were laid before the
subsequent meetings of the Board, in order to realize how strong and
sane the position of the women was:

                                                  “November 5, 1870.

  MY LORD AND GENTLEMEN,—As lecturers in the Edinburgh Medical School we
  beg most respectfully to approach your honourable Board, on behalf of
  the eight female students of this school whom, we understand, you
  object to admit to the practice of the Royal Infirmary. On their
  behalf we beg to state:—

  1. That they are regularly registered students of medicine in this
  school.

  2. That they are at present attending, along with the other students,
  our courses of anatomy, practical anatomy, demonstrations of anatomy,
  and systematic surgery, in the school at Surgeons’ Hall.

  3. That as teachers of anatomy and surgery respectively, we find no
  difficulty in conducting our courses to such mixed classes composed of
  male and female students sitting together on the same benches; and
  that the presence of those eight female students has not led us to
  alter or modify our course of instruction in any way.

  4. That the presence of the female students, so far from diminishing
  the numbers entering our classes, we find both the attendance and the
  actual numbers already enrolled are larger than in previous sessions.

  5. That in our experience in these mixed classes the demeanour of the
  students is more orderly and quiet, and their application to study
  more diligent and earnest, than during former sessions when male
  students alone were present.

  6. That, in our opinion, if practical bedside instruction in the
  examination and treatment of cases is withheld from the female pupils
  by the refusal to them of access as medical students to the practice
  of the Infirmary, we must regard the value of any systematic surgical
  course thus rendered devoid of daily practical illustration, as
  infinitely less than the same course attended by male pupils, who have
  the additional advantage of the hospital instruction under the same
  teacher.

  7. That the surgical instruction, being deprived of its practical
  aspect by the exclusion of the female pupils from the Infirmary, and
  therefore from the wards of their systematic surgical teacher, the
  knowledge of these female students may very reasonably be expected to
  suffer, not only in class-room examinations, but in their capacity to
  practise their profession in after life.

  8. That our experience of mixed classes leads us to the conviction
  that the attendance of the female students at the ordinary hospital
  visit, along with the male students, cannot certainly be more
  objectionable to the male students and the male patients than the
  presence of the ward nurses, or to the female patients than the
  presence of the male students.

  9. That the class of society to which these eight female students
  belong, together with the reserve of manner, and the serious and
  reverent spirit in which they devote themselves to the study of
  medicine, make it impossible that any impropriety could arise out of
  their attendance upon the wards as regards either patients or male
  pupils.

  In conclusion, we trust that your honourable Board may see fit, on
  considering these statements, to resolve not to exclude these female
  students from the practice of, at all events, those physicians and
  surgeons who do not object to their presence at the ordinary visit
  along with the other students.

  Such an absolute exclusion of female pupils from the wards of the
  Royal Infirmary as such a decision of your honourable Board would
  determine, we could not but regard as an act of practical injustice to
  pupils who, having been admitted to the study of the medical
  profession, must have their further progress in their studies barred
  if hospital attendance is refused them.—We are, my Lord and Gentlemen,
  your obedient servants,

                                              P. D. HANDYSIDE,
                                              PATRICK HERON WATSON.”

The second letter was a petition signed by the lady students, the famous
“Septem contra Edinam,” as they were called, enclosing _Paper A_ and
_Paper B_. It may be well to give the names of the gallant seven once
for all: Sophia Jex-Blake, Mary Edith Pechey (Mrs. Pechey Phipson),
Isabel Thorne, Matilda Chaplin (Mrs. Ayrton), Helen Evans (Mrs. Russel),
Mary Anderson (Mrs. Marshall), Emily Bovell (Mrs. Sturge).

                                                  “November 5, 1870.

  _Paper A._—We, the undersigned physicians and surgeons of the Royal
  Infirmary desire to signify our willingness to allow female students
  of medicine to attend the practice of our wards, and to express our
  opinion that such attendance would in no way interfere with the full
  discharge of our duties towards our patients and other students.

                                              J. HUGHES BENNETT,
                                              GEORGE W. BALFOUR,
                                              PATRICK HERON WATSON.”

  In _paper B_, two other medical men expressed their readiness, if
  suitable arrangements could be made, to teach the female students in
  the wards separately.

                                 “15 Buccleuch Place, Nov. 13, 1870.

  MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,—To prevent any possible misconception, I beg
  leave, in the name of my fellow-students and myself, to state
  distinctly that, while urgently requesting your honourable Board to
  issue to us the ordinary students’ tickets for the Infirmary (as they
  alone will ‘qualify’ for graduation), we have, in the event of their
  being granted, no intention whatever of attending in the wards of
  those physicians and surgeons who object to our presence there, both
  as a matter of courtesy, and because we shall be already provided with
  sufficient means of instruction in attending the wards of those
  gentlemen who have expressed their perfect willingness to receive us.—
  I beg, my Lord and Gentlemen, to subscribe myself your obedient
  servant,

                                                   SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.

  To the Honourable the Managers of the Royal Infirmary.”

Now the managers of the Infirmary were worthy folk as human nature goes,
“several” of them, says S.J.-B., known to the women as “just and
liberal-minded men,” so it is not surprising that a majority were
sufficiently moved by these arguments to desire that the request of the
women be granted. On the ground of want of notice, however, the party in
power got the matter deferred for a week.

And now, clearly, the moment had come when every effort must be made to
turn the women out altogether. If they carried their point at the next
meeting, all might well be lost.

It was at this juncture that, for the first time, some of the students
began to make themselves unpleasant, “shutting doors in our faces,
ostentatiously crowding into the seats we usually occupied, bursting
into horse laughs and howls when we approached,—as if a conspiracy had
been formed to make our position as uncomfortable as might be.” A
students’ petition against the admission of women to the Infirmary was
handed about, and 500 students signed it.

So the majority gained their point, and the party in power won an easy
victory.

“Follow it up,” said someone. “Don’t stop there. While you are at it,
why not get rid of the women altogether?”[69]

Footnote 69:

  This is a neutral and harmless paraphrase of the arguments some of the
  professors actually used in talking to the students, but one does not
  want to perpetuate the memory of words used in an angry conflict.

It was not a surprising suggestion; the presence of the women was making
some people very uncomfortable; but those who made the suggestion must
have had a pretty good idea of how the students would proceed to carry
it out, and what class of student would take the lead.

For a day or two a feeble and cowardly effort was made to obstruct the
entrance of women into the class-room, but S. J.-B., followed by her
companions, simply failed to see the students who half-heartedly stood
in her way, and walked through them.

And then came about the “riot at Surgeons’ Hall”, of which so much has
since been said, and of which Charles Reade made picturesque use in his
novel, _The Woman Hater_.

In order to get a plain, unvarnished account of what took place, we
cannot do better than quote the _Courant_[70] (the only Edinburgh
morning paper which was unfavourable to the women) and the very brief
record in S. J.-B.’s diary:

  “A disturbance of a very unbecoming nature took place yesterday
  afternoon in front of the Royal College of Surgeons, caused by the
  entrance of the lady ‘medicals’ to the class-rooms. However ungallant
  it may appear, there is no doubt that many of the students look upon
  the admission of the ladies to the classes with no friendly eye; but,
  unfortunately for their own credit, some have adopted a very
  undignified mode of signifying their displeasure. Shortly before four
  o’clock, the hour when the ladies arrive at the College, nearly two
  hundred students assembled in front of the gate leading to the
  building. As may be readily supposed, there was no lack of animation
  amongst the students; and, with other popular melodies, ‘The Whale’
  and ‘John Brown’s Body’ were sung with more spirit than good taste by
  at least a hundred voices. Such a noisy demonstration speedily
  attracted a large crowd, and greatly interfered with the public
  traffic. Shortly before four o’clock those on the outlook descried the
  approach of the ladies, and immediately their appearance was greeted
  with a howl which might have made those who are supposed to be
  possessed of more temerity, quail, but it seemingly had no effect upon
  the ladies, for they most unconcernedly advanced towards the gate, the
  students opening up their ranks to allow them to pass. On reaching the
  gate it was closed in their face. Amidst the derisive laughter which
  followed this very questionable action, it must be said to their
  credit that a number of students cried ‘shame.’ In a short time the
  janitor succeeded in opening one leaf of the gate, and the ladies were
  admitted to the precincts, but not before some of them had been
  considerably jostled.

  The anatomical class-room to which they proceeded was crowded to the
  door, and, in consequence of the noise and interruption, Dr. Handyside
  found it utterly impossible to begin his demonstrations. With much
  difficulty, he singled out those students belonging to his class, and,
  turning the others out of the room, he was about to proceed, when the
  pet sheep which grazes at the College was introduced to the room, a
  student jocularly remarking that it would be a good subject for
  anatomical purposes. Poor ‘Mailie’ was kept a prisoner, and the
  lecturer was allowed to proceed.”

Footnote 70:

  The _Courant_, Nov. 19, 1870.

“Let it remain,” Dr. Handyside had said, “it has more sense than those
who sent it here.”

  “When the class broke up, a number of the students seemed determined
  to accompany the ladies home; but the result was that several of them
  were apprehended by the police.”

The writer of the diary naturally saw things from a different point of
view:

  “Friday, 18th. On getting in sight of S(urgeons’) H(all), found mob of
  students and mixed multitude.

  Had to go down to P.O. and to Houlden’s for Mrs. Evans [a most
  characteristic touch this! in later life S. J.-B. often spoke of
  herself as ‘a sheep dog grown old.’] Then crossed road, ... Mrs.
  T[horne] and I in front, then Mrs. K[ingsley] and others.

  Reaching pavement, way cleft for us by one or two, till gate reached
  and clashed in our face, by smokers inside. I placidly leant on it
  outside, mid cries of ‘Shame,’ ‘Let them in,’ etc., till Sanderson
  sprang forward and forced it open and in we went,—Mrs. K. not, [she]
  remaining outside to hear ‘very bad language, in which I didn’t join.’
  (To S. M. M.’s great amusement.)

  Then we went in and had demonstration,—some rushed in after us.

  Dr. Handyside went out and remonstrated, etc. Then sheep introduced.

  We passed rather good examination. Then at end H. asked if we would go
  out by back door. ‘Oh, no,’ I said, ‘I am sure there are enough
  gentlemen here to prevent any harm to us.’ And so we went, Hoggan and
  Sanderson pioneering,—S. M. M. said she got hit,—Wilson came up and
  took Mrs. K.’s arm (to our momentary fright), then we proceeded home,
  escorted by

                    a. gallant cavaliers,
                    b. police,
                    c. general mob,
                    d. all boys and girls of the town.

  “Monday, 21st. Had warning of a ‘more serious demonstration’, so
  Wilson swore in the Irish Brigade. I asked Professor Wilson about it,
  and he requested Turner to keep his class till past five,—they were
  let out at 4.45![71]

Footnote 71:

    One hopes this fact was incorrectly reported; it has never been
    contradicted. Possibly the Professor was annoyed at being asked to
    effect that by force which could safely be confided to the
    gentlemanly feeling of his students.

  However, it being rainy, there was almost no crowd.

  “Tuesday 22nd.... The Irish Brigade filed in to demonstration, and
  then escorted us home,—some 30 or 40 in all. One woman hissed. W. as
  we came to crossing regretted it ‘hadn’t been swept,’ etc.—otherwise
  all quiet. The O’Halloran squired E. P., called her ‘ma belle,’
  declared ‘a loife wasn’t much, but all the Irishmen would lay down
  theirs before we came to harm,’ etc.

  And in the passage, the same mighty chief shook my hand nearly off,
  vowing the pleasure it would give him and his to be any service to us,
  etc., etc.

  They gave us a great cheer when they got to the door.

  In the crowd B. heard,—‘You know they’d never do it if they could get
  married.’ ‘Eh, you‘re wrong there, there are some very good-looking
  ones among them.‘ ‘Eh, now, see the students escorting them home,—
  isn’t it pretty?’

  And O‘Halloran’s troubles with his men. ‘For God’s sake, look after
  X.! It’s his first night out, and he’ll be wanting to distinguish
  himself,—he’ll be hitting a policeman!’

  Altogether great ‘demonstration in favour,’ as _Daily Review_ says.

  “Wednesday, 23rd. Same escort, though little necessary.”

The Wilson who swore in the Irish Brigade, has, of course, no connection
with Professor Wilson. He was a student, and remained throughout life a
loyal supporter of the cause.[72] His letter, written on the Sunday
following the riot, is interesting:

  “DEAR MISS PECHEY,—I wish to warn you, and, through you, your friends,
  that you are to be mobbed again on Monday. A regular conspiracy has
  been, I fear, set on foot for that purpose. I wish you to tell your
  friends that, although the projected demonstration against you on
  Monday is intended to be much more serious than the one on Friday, and
  to frighten you all away, you need not in the least fear it. I have
  made what I hope to be efficient arrangements for your protection. I
  have passed the word round amongst a lot of my friends—not wholly
  inexperienced in the kind of work—and you will be all right.

  I had a meeting with my friend, Micky O’Halloran who is leader of a
  formidable band, known in College as the ‘Irish Brigade,’ and he has
  consented to tell off a detachment of his set for duty on Monday.
  Micky was the formidable hero with the big red moustache who stood by
  us on Friday and whose presence with us rather disappointed the
  rioters who, I think, calculated on the aid both of himself and his
  set. I have taken care of _that_, and I believe the mere demonstration
  of the fact that you have men on your side able and willing to protect
  you, will deter the mob from even an attempt at a row.

  They are a cowardly lot, nearly all very young, and I don’t think they
  have even one amongst them, who has had experience of the days when
  street-rioting was one of the accomplishments Edinburgh students were
  acquainted with, so they are not likely to be very troublesome. I
  believe they’ll ‘cave in’ if you only show a brave front. I have
  considerable influence also with the Highlanders in College, and
  expect to get a good deal of help from them, when I pass the word
  round tomorrow.

  May I venture to hint my belief that the real cause of the riots is
  the way some of the professors run you down in their lectures. They
  never lose a chance of stirring up hatred against you. For all I know
  they may have more knowledge of the riotous conspiracy than most
  people fancy. However, as I tell you, you and your friends need not
  fear, as far as Monday is concerned. You will be taken good care of.

                           Yours faithfully,
                                                      ROBERT WILSON.

  P.S. I would have sent this communication through Mrs. Kingsley, but
  as I have no chance of seeing her tomorrow, and as you are her friend,
  I send it to you.”

Footnote 72:

  In January, 1886, Mr. Robert Wilson had an article, “Æsculapia
  Victrix,” in the _Fortnightly Review_.

Mr. Henry Kingsley was at this time editor of the _Daily Review_, and
almost as redoubtable a champion of the cause as Alexander Russel
himself. Of Mrs. Henry Kingsley’s loyalty it is impossible to speak in
exaggerated terms. In the drawing-room, in the columns of a newspaper,
and on the platform, she was equally ready to defend a fighting cause,
and to correct the numerous misapprehensions that sprang up in
connection with it. She attended the scientific classes without any idea
of qualifying as a doctor, mainly for the purpose of identifying herself
with the movement, and with people who had her wholehearted sympathy and
admiration.

The news of the “Riot” went forth over the whole world, and the
indignation roused by the matter of the Hope Scholarship was as nothing
compared to that called forth by this escapade. “We trust the
authorities of the medical school at Edinburgh will visit exemplary
chastisement on the cowardly cads—we have no milder name for them—who
could so conduct themselves towards the ladies who paid them the
compliment of supposing they could act like gentlemen. Edinburgh has
ceased to be so attractive as she was as a centre of education.” This
was a fair specimen of the indignant criticism called forth, and one is
glad to record that none were more prompt to disown the delinquents than
the more reputable of the students themselves. Some few papers, even of
some standing, espoused the cause of the rioters; and, in order to do
this, it was perhaps almost necessary to represent the women and their
doings in a way that disgusted all decent-minded men,—“a brutality,”
said the _Spectator_, with reference to a given article, “of which a
costermonger quarrelling with a fishwife would be ashamed.”[73]

Footnote 73:

  _Spectator_, December 3, 1870.

Some of us can imagine, too, the style of anonymous letter which the
women received, and such letters were rather terrible to the women of
those days.

  “‘Well!—we are about in the deepest waters now,—that’s one comfort,’
  says S. J.-B.”

  “‘What _do_ you think your constitution is made of that it will stand
  such overwork?’ writes Miss Du Pre at this time. ‘You will be a real
  martyr to the cause, if you don’t take care. Yet I know you never
  needlessly use up one atom of strength, so I get a fearful idea of
  what the amount of work must be. I _do_ wish you could just sit down
  to your lessons quietly as the men students can.

  The two newspaper articles made me nicely angry! I think the —— is the
  lowest, but, when you get to such a depth it is not easy to measure
  degrees of lowness. I should think such attacks must make you feel as
  if all people on the other side were low and mean and wicked,—don’t
  they? It’s always so hard to believe that one’s opponents may be good
  and honest and even sensible; but when any of them write such letters
  as those, I think it must be well nigh impossible.’”

A new Act came into operation at this time, and all the Managers of the
Royal Infirmary had to retire from the Board unless re-elected. Now was
the time to get in members favourable to the admission of the women, if
this could be done. One can imagine the canvassing that took place on
both sides.

Here are some characteristic “thumb-nails” from the diary:

  “Littlejohn at Police Court,—very uncomfortable talk; he so very
  candid and honest, but believing he ought to vote against us in
  Infirmary, because ‘by hook or by crook’ they’d got up such a spirit
  among the students (L. was ‘ashamed of his sex’) that he was afraid
  persistence would injure the School.

  M.,—£1000 subscriber. Quiet, simple, not narrow or hard,—only not
  interested previously. Said he ‘must think of it now,’ though his
  prejudices were against women doctors. I showed him that that was only
  a detail,—the question of justice lay beyond.

  L. R.,—Had nothing to do with it, etc.,—but thought it all improper.

  ‘The young men in female wards?’... ‘Oh, it was _their_ business’!!”

At the Annual Meeting of Contributors on January 2nd, 1871, the hall at
the Council Chambers was crowded long before the advertised hour, though
that hour was one o’clock. Proceedings began with a hot dispute among
the civic magnates as to the propriety of adjourning to the High Church
(St. Giles’ Cathedral) which would seat a larger number of people,—the
representative of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners declaring that the
Police Court would be a more suitable place, but allowing himself to be
over-ruled on a point of law by Mr. Duncan M‘Laren, M.P. for Edinburgh.
By the time the move to the church had been effected, everyone was
“rubbed up the wrong way,” and there was a good deal of squabbling and
noisy interruption before the main question at issue came on at all.

The Lord Provost himself proposed the election of six men known to be in
favour of the women students, and an amended list was proposed by one of
the Infirmary Medical Staff. Warm language was used on both sides, and
interruptions were frequent. This was the atmosphere in which S. J.-B.—
in the capacity of a subscriber—asked leave to speak.[74]

Footnote 74:

  Someone has pointed out that she was the first woman to speak in St.
  Giles’ Church since Jenny Geddes threw her stool at the minister.

She was, as has been said, one of the finest women speakers of her time;
but, even in her maturity, she was wont to suffer beforehand from an
access of nervousness, of which, happily, no trace was obvious when the
crucial moment arrived. What she must have suffered on this first
occasion in Edinburgh we can imagine. We know that she was over-worked
and tired, and that her honest resentment had been raised to the highest
pitch by the way in which some of those in authority were inciting the
students to make trouble. It was deliberately said later by certain
grave and responsible Edinburgh citizens that she had suffered
“unexampled provocation.” She wished the contributors to know the real
truth of the situation, and she was resolved that the presence of her
adversaries should not deter her from giving a plain, unvarnished
account of what had taken place. She had realized the danger of failing
from cowardice; but, in her inexperience, she had not realized the
danger of going to the other extreme: and that was what she did. Part of
her speech might quite justly be described as a direct personal attack
on one or two individuals.

She spoke well, of course, but she owed her gift to Nature, in no way to
Art: and she was confronted by those—double her age and more—who had
learned the full value of outward calmness and urbanity in debate.

She had many friends in that church, and most of them must have suffered
acutely: not because they did not agree with her, but because they did.
Some whose allegiance was of little value, or who had come with “an open
mind,” probably went over to the enemy. One is almost surprised to hear
that it was only by the usual narrow majority—94 to 88 in this instance—
that her cause was defeated.

And yet, perhaps, one ought not to be surprised: for courage and honesty
make their own appeal; and the sore heart-burnings of generous adherents
are a fire in which great things are kindled.

Of course hostile papers jeered. The _Church Review_ went out of its way
to take up the matter. As it began by severely criticising on literary
grounds the speaker’s use of the words “realize” and “emanate,” one
wonders that it ever came to the end of its indictment at all.[75]

Footnote 75:

  At a later date (1872) the _Church Review_ became definitely friendly.

We quote the part of the speech that was destined to lead to farther
proceedings:[76]

  “I want to point out that it was certain of these same men, who had
  (so to speak) pledged themselves from the first to defeat our hopes of
  education and render all our efforts abortive—who, sitting in their
  places on the Infirmary Board, took advantage of the almost
  irresponsible power with which they were temporarily invested, to
  thwart and nullify our efforts. I believe that a majority of the
  managers desired to act justly in this matter; but the presence of
  those bitter partisans, and the overwhelming influence of every kind
  brought to bear by them, prevailed to carry the day—to refuse us not
  only admission on the ordinary terms, but also to refuse us every
  opportunity which could answer our purpose. I know of the noble
  protests made against this injury by some of the most respected and
  most learned members of the Board, but all their efforts were in vain,
  because strings were pulled and weapons brought into play of which
  they either did not know or could not expose the character. Till then,
  during a period of five weeks, the conduct of the students with whom
  we had been associated in Surgeons’ Hall, in the most trying of all
  our studies, that of Practical Anatomy, had been quiet, respectful,
  and in every way inoffensive. They had evidently accepted our presence
  there, in earnest silent work, as a matter of course, and Dr.
  Handyside, in answer to a question of mine after the speeches at the
  meeting of the General Council, assured me that, in the course of some
  twenty sessions, he had never had a month of such quiet earnest work
  as since we entered his rooms. But at a certain meeting of the
  managers when our memorial was presented, a majority of those present
  were, I understand, in favour of immediately admitting us to the
  Infirmary. The minority alleged want of due notice of the question,
  and succeeded in obtaining an adjournment.

  What means were used in the interim I cannot say, or what influence
  was brought to bear; but I do know that from that day the conduct of
  the students was utterly changed, that those who had hitherto been
  quiet and courteous became impertinent and offensive; and at last came
  the day of that disgraceful riot, when the college gates were shut in
  our faces and our little band bespattered with mud from head to foot.
  (“Shame.”) It is true that other students who were too manly to dance
  as puppets on such ignoble strings, came indignantly to our rescue,
  that by them the gates were wrenched open and we protected in our
  return to our homes. But none the less it was evident that some new
  influence (wholly distinct from any intrinsic facts) had been at work.
  I will not say that the rioters were acting under orders, but neither
  can I disbelieve what I was told by indignant gentlemen in the medical
  class—that this disgraceful scene would never have happened, nor would
  the petition have been got up at the same time, had it not been
  clearly understood that our opponents needed a weapon at the Infirmary
  Board. This I do know, that the riot was not wholly or mainly due to
  the students at Surgeons’ Hall. I know that Dr. Christison’s class
  assistant was one of the leading rioters—(hisses and order)—and the
  foul language he used could only be excused on the supposition I heard
  that he was intoxicated. I do not say that Dr. Christison knew of or
  sanctioned his presence, but I do say that I think he would not have
  been there, had he thought the doctor would have strongly objected to
  his presence.

  _Dr. Christison_—‘I must again appeal to you, my Lord. I think the
  language used regarding my assistant is language that no one is
  entitled to use at such an assembly as this—(hear)—where a gentleman
  is not here to defend himself, and to say whether it be true or not. I
  do not know whether it is true or not, but I do know my assistant is a
  thorough gentleman, otherwise he never would have been my assistant;
  and I appeal to you again, my Lord, whether language such as this is
  to be allowed in the mouth of any person. I am perfectly sure there is
  not one gentleman in the whole assembly who would have used such
  language in regard to an absentee.’

  _Miss Jex-Blake_—‘If Dr. Christison prefers——’

  _Dr. Christison_—‘I wish nothing but that this foul language shall be
  put an end to.’

  _The Lord Provost_—‘I do not know what the foul language is. She
  merely said that in her opinion——’

  _Dr. Christison_—‘In her opinion the gentleman was intoxicated.’

  _Miss Jex-Blake_—‘I did not say he was intoxicated. I said I was told
  he was.’

  _The Lord Provost_—‘Withdraw the word “intoxicated.”’

  _Miss Jex-Blake_—‘I said it was the only excuse for his conduct. If
  Dr. Christison prefers that I should say he used the language when
  sober, I will withdraw the other supposition’ (laughter).”

Footnote 76:

  _Scotsman_, January 3, 1871.

The _Pall Mall_,[77] chuckling sympathetically over this and another
repartee, wisely concluded:

  “It is sincerely to be hoped that these unhappy little differences
  will soon come to an end. It cannot be to the advantage of anyone that
  lady students should be pelted with mud, or that they should use the
  power of retaliation displayed by their champion at the Royal
  Infirmary meeting on Monday.”

Footnote 77:

  January 5, 1871.

So the conflict deepened, and it would have been small wonder if all but
the very brave had taken fright.

But Edinburgh did contain some very brave people besides the women
students.

At the meeting on January 2nd, the Revd. Professor Charteris had been
ruled out of order in some matter, but, at the earliest opportunity he
returned to his point, and brought forward a motion, expressing the
desire of the contributors that immediate arrangement should be made for
the admission of the ladies to the Infirmary. This motion, seconded by
Sir James Coxe, M.D., was lost by a small majority.

Several things happened at that meeting, however, which were of more
value to the cause than a formal victory would have been:

A petition was read, signed by 956 women of Edinburgh, expressing “our
great interest in the issues involved, and our earnest hope that full
facilities for hospital study will be afforded by the Managers to all
women who desire to enter the Medical Profession.”

More important still was the appearance of Mrs. Nichol, a well-known and
most gracious elderly lady, endowed with the very fragrance of early
Victorian womanhood, who came forward to ask a question,—“not,” she
said, “in the interests of the lady students, but on behalf of those
women who looked forward to see what kind of men were they who were to
be the sole medical attendants of the next generation, if women doctors
were not allowed.”

  “If the students studying at present in the Infirmary cannot
  contemplate with equanimity the presence of ladies as fellow-students,
  how is it possible that they can possess either the scientific spirit,
  or the personal purity of mind, which alone could justify their
  presence in the female wards during the most delicate operations on,
  and examinations of, female patients.”

Yes, there were very brave people in Edinburgh besides the women
students.

This question was received with “laughter, hisses and applause,” and no
one ventured on a reply. No one except the rougher of the students who
were assembled in the gallery on the look-out for a lark. They howled
their appreciation of the question; but it was only when S. J.-B. rose
to speak—and of course she had to pay the penalty of having rashly
described them as “puppets”—that they really let themselves go,—shouting
and yelling and pelting her with peas.

“Well,” said Professor Blackie, “ye can now say ye’ve fought with beasts
at Ephesus.”

As a matter of fact she had not meant to speak again, but one of the
professors had left her no alternative. In the course of a long speech
he had asserted that, in consequence of mixed education, a college in
America “had become so degraded that a woman who respected herself
shrank from the contamination, and preferred to renounce the benefit of
years of study rather than don the academic robe of one of its
graduates.”

“Name the college,” said S. J.-B., and other voices took up the cry of
“Name!”

  “He spoke on authority.” (A voice—“What authority?”) “On the authority
  of Miss Blake herself, who ... when asked why she had not pursued her
  studies instead of coming here, told him that the character of female
  medical students in America had so deteriorated that she could not
  consent to stay.”

It cannot be easy to speak when one has awaited one’s opportunity
through a storm of hooting and pea-throwing; but now indeed S. J.-B.’s
fine courage and truthfulness shone out like the sun:

  “She wished merely to give an absolute, unqualified denial to
  Professor X.’s statement respecting her. She never made the statement
  he asserted she had made. During her whole visit to America she had
  never spent one whole session in any medical college whatever.... It
  was true she had studied two years in a woman’s hospital, and every
  day’s experience there had made her long more and more to see women in
  charge of their own sex—(Great interruption and cries of ‘Order’)—and
  it was her experience in that hospital and her knowledge of the ladies
  connected with it [One can almost hear her inward cry, ‘Oh, Lucy!’]
  that made her devote her life to getting medical education for herself
  and also for other women.... Some of the friends she was proudest of
  were women doctors in America who had been educated there entirely,
  and in regard to whom she scarcely knew any equals and certainly no
  superiors.”

It was only in answer to repeated calls that Professor X. rose and said,
“He was sure there was not an individual in that meeting who would not
give him credit for having given what he believed to be the correct
version of what occurred according to his recollection two years ago—
(Hisses and cheers)—between Miss Jex-Blake and himself. If he had
misconceived what had been said, or if his memory had failed him and he
had stated what was not correct, he begged to apologise, as it was
purely unintentional.” (Applause and hisses.)

A somewhat disappointing outcome this, of a long course of training in
scientific exactness.

It was now that the Professor of Moral Philosophy (Calderwood) rose,
profoundly stirred beneath the calm and judicial demeanour that seldom
failed him, and pointed out that Professor X., while speaking to the
amendment “that the question (of the women students) be left to the
unbiassed decision of the Managers,” had voluntarily given them a fair
average specimen of an unbiassed opinion!

There are worse adversaries, in fact, than the honest beasts at Ephesus.

A sore heart lay behind that jest of Professor Blackie’s if one may
judge by the following letter:

                                        “24 Hill Street,
                                               Edinburgh.
                                                 20th January, 1871.

  MY DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        It is of no consequence to you, my poor sympathy with you all at
  present, and my utter horror of the conduct of your enemies; but I
  wish to tell you how saddened my husband was by all he saw and heard
  at the Infirmary meeting last week. He sat at tea-time shading his
  eyes, and saying quietly from time to time, ‘I am ashamed of my sex.’
  I never saw him so hurt before. I am sure the unmanly and indecent
  conduct of these poor ill-led young men, and the untruthfulness of
  their leaders will ultimately do you good. If men lose our respect and
  confidence, let them look to themselves. Your admirable letters must
  do great good.

  Pardon this intrusion, and believe me always your true friend,

                                                  E. H. S. BLACKIE.”

No less welcome, we may be sure, was this:

                                               Huntly Lodge,
                                                     Monday Evening.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I am feeling inexpressibly for you and your friends this
  evening, and cannot resist the inclination that has come over me to
  tell you how deeply grateful everyone who has the welfare of the next
  generation at heart must feel to you who are so nobly fighting the
  battle which must soon be gained—the _results_ of which will bear
  _precious fruit_, I fully believe, long, long after even your heads
  are laid in the grave.

  You and the struggle you are carrying on remind me so forcibly of the
  contest which the band of women in America so nobly waged with the
  demon of Slavery. Your struggle will end much sooner, I trust, than
  did theirs, but, whilst sympathising with you, I cannot help feeling
  that the discussion is doing so much to educate people’s minds, that
  it is better for the cause than if you had met with no opposition; and
  in the end it may be better for you also, for by the time you are
  ready to practise, persons will have become accustomed to the idea and
  ready for you.

  Meanwhile tell us if there is aught we outsiders can do for you, and
  believe me, with love to dear Miss Pechey,

                                    Your affectionate,
                                                       E. P. NICHOL.

  I am sure you will like to know that I don’t feel a bit the worse for
  this day’s work.

  You will excuse haste and some little weariness.”

Once more we are tempted to quote from a delightful budget:

                                           “13 Sussex Square,
                                                 Brighton,
                                                    Jan. 19th. 1871.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        One line to wish you many happy returns of the 21st, and most of
  them quieter than this birthday seems likely to be.

  I feel sure you will carry your point eventually, and should recommend
  you to stick to Edinburgh where you have already so very nearly won.

  It must be very harassing at times, and need a great deal of patience:
  for half the enemy seem wily and half seem roughs.

  The speech you last made, when the gallery ought to have been earlier
  cleared of its noisy occupants, seemed to me excellent: and I thought
  Maclaren showed great judgment in dealing with the adversary that same
  day. I should not be drawn much into newspaper correspondence, if I
  were you; and I doubt if ... was worth powder and shot. But he may be,
  from personal or local reasons unknown to me.

  I feel no doubt whatever of the ultimate victory, but the delay is
  very fatiguing to the combatant.... Take it easy, and don’t let the
  enemy make you angry. They are sure to try.

                            Your affectionate brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

Very soon, too, a long letter arrived from women in London,—“to the Lady
Students in Edinburgh:

  “DEAR LADY STUDENTS,

        Let us entreat you to persevere—” and so on.

Here then were both parties firmly entrenched, with no prospect of an
end to the combat; but that fire in the hearts of generous adherents was
burning steadily. The Lord Provost declined to accept his defeat. He
proceeded to call a meeting of citizens, and in a very short time a
committee was formed to share a burden that had become far too heavy for
the shoulders of a handful of women. The list of sympathizers grew like
a snowball, attracting many of the most honoured names in the country,
till it became a rallying cry for weaker folk the wide world over. One
can best describe the significance of all this in S. J.-B.’s own words,
written some fifteen years later:

  “To the Committee thus inaugurated, we owe a debt of gratitude which I
  hardly know how to describe adequately. From that time forward to the
  close of our battle in Edinburgh, they stood by us with a fidelity and
  chivalrous readiness to help which was never marred by officiousness
  or needless interference. In a very short time they lifted from our
  shoulders the whole burden of pecuniary risk and responsibility, and,
  by personal and public help of every kind, made it possible for us to
  continue the struggle in which, without such aid, we should have been
  hopelessly outnumbered. Where so many gave us such invaluable
  assistance, it is almost invidious to single out any for special
  thanks; and yet I cannot refrain from putting on record our extreme
  debt of gratitude to three men, of whom two have already passed away
  from among us, viz., the Lord Provost of Edinburgh (William Law), who
  gave us continually the support of his official countenance and
  assistance; Mr. Alexander Russel, Editor of the _Scotsman_, whose
  advocacy was literally beyond all price in those days, when our one
  hope and our great difficulty was to get the real truth laid fully and
  fearlessly before the public; and our still invaluable friend,
  Professor Masson, whose championship of the weak and oppressed was
  then, and always has been, worthy of the noblest days of chivalry.”




                               CHAPTER IX
                          THE ACTION FOR LIBEL


It is not to be supposed, however, that the dark days were at an end.
Far from it. The next act in the drama was an action for libel brought
against S. J.-B. by Professor Christison’s assistant.

Of course she took the lawyer’s letter smiling, but it must have seemed
well-nigh the last straw, for she was sorely overstrained by the public
meetings and all the criticism they called forth; and her entire
Christmas holiday had been spent in calling on Infirmary managers. These
were naturally of all sorts, from the big bustling prosperous brewer to
the refined gentlewoman of equally restricted outlook; and the strain of
adaptation to such divers personalities must have been very great.

Even on Christmas Day[78] (a Sunday!) she had been at the _Scotsman_
office, arranging with the Editor for the alteration and publication of
various entries on the following day. Things were not made easier by the
fact that a heavy fall of snow had been followed by alternating spells
of slush and ice. All the other students had gone out of town, and in
many ways it would have been better all round if she had gone too. But
her supporters simply could not get on without her. She might on
occasion be difficult and trying, expecting more of people than they
were prepared to give; but no one else could even compare with her in
knowledge of all the facts and arguments that might at any moment be
called for by the emergencies of a big public controversy. There was no
need for professors, editors and others to charge their memories with
endless _minutiae_ when S. J.-B. was at hand, clear and concise, as a
book of handy reference.

Footnote 78:

  “God bless the Massons,” writes Mrs. Jex-Blake, “for cheering my
  darling on Christmas Day.”

Life was too full this year for the accustomed backward survey at
midnight on December 31st; there was no quotation of “May the New Year
cherish—” This is the entry:

  “Less utterly hopeless tonight,—only _so_ tired. E. P. just back,
  bless her!”

Well, in any case, here was the lawyer’s letter, and it just had to be
faced. There is no reference to it in the diary till long after—indeed,
except as a register of facts that have now lost all interest, the diary
becomes almost non-existent—but, in a day or two, the news was all over
the country. It was more than could be expected of human nature that
some of the women students should not have felt aggrieved that the
situation had been complicated by their leader’s impulsiveness. On the
whole they were loyal, especially the three first recruits, Mrs. Thorne,
Mrs. Evans, and “E. P.,—bless her!”

But, as ever, faithful friends gathered round, and, if the postman’s
visit had become a thing to be dreaded, he also brought much good cheer.
Here is a letter from the wife of a leading minister of religion:

  “DEAR MRS. EVANS,

        The opposition have ‘crowned the edifice’ by bringing that
  action of Damages against Miss Jex-Blake,—how unspeakably low and
  unmanly it all is. I never knew before that saying a man was drunk was
  actionable; if it is we must be very careful how we speak even of our
  nearest and dearest. I think a subscription ought to be set on foot at
  once to pay Miss Jex-Blake’s expenses, and I shall be delighted to
  contribute my mite.”

One can only quote one or two out of many:

                                                “The Athenaeum,
                                                      Jan. 23, 1871.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        I will gladly pay half expenses of your action for libel brought
  by Dr. Christison’s assistant.

  I think it vital that you should have the best legal assistance, and
  win. Be careful, and don’t let them ‘draw’ you into indiscretions that
  are most forgiveable morally, but damaging to the cause practically.

  I don’t the least want to lecture you or assume the Mentor. I only
  want you to win all along the line.

                                     Your aff. brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

The next is written in a clear and clerkly hand:

  “Miss Jex-Blake, Ph.D.
      Edinburgh.

                                          Kinbuck, 7 February, 1871.

  MADAM,

        We the undersigned desire to express our most sincere sympathy
  with your cause and earnest hopes for your success.

  I am, Your obedient Servants,—”

Follows a list of four names, apparently of young business men. One
wonders which of them conceived the bold idea of the “Ph.D.” How gladly
they would have made it “M.D.” if they could!

The letter was addressed to “Miss Jex-Blake, Royal Infirmary,
Edinburgh,” and is grimly endorsed, “Not for Royal Infirmary.”

One more letter we are tempted to quote with very mingled feelings:

                                                 “19 Inverleith Row,
                                                   Edinburgh.
                                                  27 January 1871.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I see that Mr. C. has raised an action against you. If you have
  not already fixed on a counsel to defend you, will you allow me to
  propose that you should employ my son-in-law, Mr. Trayner. I propose
  this, not for his advantage but your own, as I am quite sure from the
  great interest he would take in your case, and also that I know you
  would find in him, not only an able advocate, but a kind friend, that
  you would have no cause to regret the choice.

                      Believe me, dear Miss Jex-Blake,
                                             Very truly yours,
                                                     MARGARET WYLD.”

From another source one learns that Mr. Trayner [now Lord Trayner], if
employed, would have done the work without fee, from sheer sympathy with
the cause.

The pity of it! One cannot help feeling how differently things might
have gone, if S. J.-B. had availed herself of this suggestion. “The best
legal advice” is an expression capable of varied interpretation, and of
course S. J.-B.—young and inexperienced—was guided by her solicitors. It
is possible, too, of course, that the advice was good.

Young and inexperienced she was in matters of this kind,—full of hope
that she, who had nothing to hide and everything to gain from full
publicity, would see herself substantially justified in an open court of
law.

On the whole, public opinion was against her. All sorts of stories were
rife, many of them entirely false, some with just that grain of truth
that makes a lie so deadly. When the Winter Session came to an end in
March, the President of the College of Physicians and the President of
the College of Surgeons both announced that they would not preside at
the prize-giving if lady students were to be present and to receive
their prizes on this occasion.

On the other hand S. J.-B. was, of course, much sought after by
outsiders who admired her talent and courage. In April she was urged by
the leading women suffragists of the day to speak at a Suffrage meeting
in London, and, after consulting Professor Masson and other friends in
Edinburgh as to the probable effect on her own “Cause,” she agreed.

  “Darling,” writes her sorely-tried Mother, “speaking at a public
  meeting will be anything but restful. You positively require rest to
  go on with the real work and worrying work before you. May you be
  guided aright.”

The speech took place, however, and was a great success. Her “pathetic
voice” and clear exposition of the argument deduced from her own trying
experience are referred to repeatedly. This was her first public
association with a cause of which, throughout life, she was one of the
sanest and most practical exponents.

It was in the course of this visit to London, too, that she made the
acquaintance of Mr. (afterwards Sir James) Stansfeld, whose influence
was to prove so priceless in the farther development of the movement.

Meanwhile the law ran its slow and expensive course.

  “Monday, May 22nd.... White Millar wants to know if I will say C.
  ‘wasn’t drunk’ if he on his side allows that I ‘had been told so.’

  I don’t want to be too obstinately pugnacious, but I hate the idea of
  giving a handle to people to say I ‘ate my words’. Calderwood wisely
  says it should be a _sine qua non_ that the public should know the
  overture came from them, and I should like also to make C. own he was
  ‘Foremost among the rioters’.

  “Tuesday May 23rd. I have just accepted Lord Advocate at fee of £200,
  so now it shall go on unless they pay costs....

  “May 26th, Friday 10 p.m. ‘Where the wicked cease from troubling and
  the weary are at rest.’

  _How_ inclined one feels to turn one’s face to the wall and say with
  Elijah, ‘Lord, take away my life, I am not better than my fathers’.

  The obstinate lying of these students in preference to giving any
  information possibly useful to us;—the constant hisses and rudeness
  even in the streets,—J’s insolent civility, especially to Miss B.,—
  those two scamps shouting ‘Whore’ after S. M. M., as she crossed the
  George Square Gardens yesterday evening, etc.

  Oh, dear, I hope Tuesday at least will end one worry satisfactorily. I
  think it must clear me morally at any rate!—and yet I have that
  nervous quiver through me as when one wakes with nightmare. I wonder
  if any such hysterical wretch ever had to do such work as mine!

  And yet what good friends and helpers! Gilbert’s ever ready kindness,
  Wilson’s hearty interest, ‘Well, if you lose on Tuesday, even you will
  not be more vexed than I shall’.”

The case came on for trial on May 31st. On the morning of the day, S.
J.-B. received the following letter from her Mother:

  “God’s protection and blessing be with you, my own precious child. I
  will not harass and plague you by writing further than to assure you I
  am in spirit present with you.

                                            Your loving,
                                                         M. E. J.-B.

  I am quite well, and picturing how calm and collected you are, and how
  _many many_ are thinking of you with friendly thoughts.”

The case lasted two days. It was reported verbally in the _Scotsman_ and
other daily papers. “Throughout the day the Court-room was densely
crowded, many ladies being among the audience.” For many, of course,
this was the first opportunity of seeing these amazing women, and for
some time the provincial and weekly papers ran riot in impressions of
this kind:

  “Mrs. Thorne succeeded as witness, and the assembled public thought it
  very hard that she should be neither odd nor eccentric. Why was she
  married? She was a medical student and ought not to be married.
  Sedate, quiet and ladylike-looking, and dressed in an unobtrusive
  fashion, and yet fairly within the pale of orthodoxy, Mrs. Thorne
  confused the minds of many.”

  “Miss Pechey was the sole remaining witness, and created a good deal
  of fresh interest. A tall figure and a classically shaped head with
  dark hair, are generally supposed to be the attributes of young ladies
  who keep to their ‘sphere.’ That female medical students should dare
  to be good-looking, dare to be married, dare to be dressed in good
  taste, is, of course, an unpardonable crime.”

  “Great interest of course was manifested in [Miss Jex-Blake’s]
  appearance in the witness box. Plainly dressed in black, with white
  round her neck and wrists, she presented the appearance of a tall and
  well formed, handsome and determined woman, with dark hair and eyes.
  She was perfectly cool and collected, and her manner was a great
  contrast to the nervousness of Dr. Christison and the ‘smartness’ of
  Dr. Bell.”

So much for the “hysterical wretch”!

In truth the women had learned their lesson. There was no bitter,
impulsive speaking now. They said what they meant to say, and they said
it well and with restraint. “These customers _are_ composed!” a man in
the back of the Court was heard to exclaim.

As has been said, S. J.-B. had everything to gain from publicity, from a
full exposure of the facts. The worst she had done had been to state her
case in public without fear of persons, without much tact and
discretion, though with no exaggeration of the actual truth. The public
had already passed judgment on her. She was now on her defence, desirous
only of asking her opponents, under cross-examination, to deny the truth
of what she had said.

But the law of libel is an intricate and parlous thing. S. J.-B. had
been told by several people of standing—including her teacher and his
assistant—that Professor Christison’s assistant had been a ringleader in
the riot; but she did not know of her own knowledge that he had been so.

  “I wished,” she says, “to plead the substantial truth of my statement;
  but, being, of course, ignorant of Scotch law, I was overruled by my
  Counsel, among whom was the Lord Advocate of Scotland (Young), on the
  ground that I could not _personally_ prove the truth of what I had
  said, as indeed I did not know the young man by sight, and it would be
  held an aggravation of the injury to plead ‘Veritas’ in a matter which
  was, after all, only one of hearsay. I was assured that, if the case
  came to trial, abundant opportunity would be given to prove the young
  man’s real conduct in the matter.”

This opportunity, however, was relentlessly withheld.

The case for the defence was one to rejoice the heart of a brilliant
counsel, being full of technical opportunity,—and to a brilliant counsel
it fell. So entirely did Mr. Shand (afterwards Lord Shand) rely on his
own bow and spear to win the day,—and it must be admitted that there was
nothing else to rely on—that he dared to risk the conclusions which must
inevitably be drawn from his omission to call the pursuer as a witness
on his own side; he dared to provoke a laugh by saying that Mr. C. “was
not so fond of public appearances as the defendant.” He laid down in his
opening statement the law that must govern the case, and with dogged
tenacity, he brought the Judge and everyone else in Court to heel. Lord
Mure, as it chanced, was easily led. The choice of a Judge in Scotland
lies with the pursuer, and in any case it might not have been easy to
find one in those days who had a prejudice in favour of women doctors.

One is glad to know that the protagonist appeared “cool and collected”
to the indifferent observer, but she must have been on the rack much of
the time, for the “substantial truth and right” for which she longed,
got no chance at all, or rather they saved their lives only by losing
them, so to speak; and that is one of time’s revenges that youth cannot
foresee.

The full report of the case appeared in the _Scotsman_ of May 31st and
June 1st. The following extracts are taken mainly from the Edinburgh
_Evening Courant_, because they are slightly abbreviated, and because
they appeared in a paper unfriendly to the cause of the women.

  “There could be no doubt,” said the advocate for the pursuer, “that,
  however injurious the arguments she used might be, if they were
  justified by facts, it was perfectly open to Miss Jex-Blake to
  maintain that her statements were true, and to take what is called an
  ‘issue in justification,’ for the purpose of establishing upon her own
  issue, as counter to the present one, what she said. But she had not
  chosen to do that: it was not pretended that the statements were true;
  and therefore the only question the jury had to try was, practically,
  whether those statements were to the pursuer’s loss, injury, and
  damage.[79]”

Footnote 79:

  _Scotsman_, May 31, 1871.

This argument, fair enough as coming from an advocate, represents to all
intents and purposes, the attitude adopted by the Judge. The case
positively bristled with arguments, but the humblest appearance of a
really relevant fact brought Mr. Shand to his feet with a taboo.

  “Thomas Sanderson deponed in answer to Mr. M‘Laren—I am a student of
  medicine and last winter I attended Dr. Laycock’s class. On the 18th
  November I was at the gate leading to Surgeons’ Hall. There was a
  large crowd of students and a larger crowd of other people at the
  gate. The students were both inside and outside the gate. The majority
  were University students. I assisted the ladies to pass through the
  College gate. I was pulled about a little by the students. The
  students were hooting, and oaths and offensive expressions were used.

  Among the students inside the gate did you recognize Mr. C.?

  Mr. Shand (to witness)—Don’t answer that question.

  Lord Mure sustained the objection.

  Mr. M‘Laren—Did you see Mr. C. at any time on the 18th November?

  Witness—Yes.

  Where did you see him?—At the Surgeons’ Hall.

  At what time of the day did you see him?—A few minutes after four
  o’clock.

  How was Mr. C. conducting himself?

  Lord Mure disallowed the question.

  E. C. C., examined by the Lord Advocate, deponed—I am the pursuer in
  this action. I was twenty-one years of age last August.

  You remember the riot at Surgeons’ Hall on the 18th of November?—I do.

  Where were you?

  Mr. Shand objected to this question. His Lordship had already ruled
  that no evidence could be led as to whether the witness took part in
  these proceedings; and it seemed as if the Lord Advocate was
  attempting to evade his Lordship’s decision.

  Lord Mure said this was a general question and he allowed it to be put
  to the witness.

  The Lord Advocate—Where were you at the time? Witness—At what time?

  At the time of the riot?—I was at the College of Surgeons during part
  of the time.

  When did you go there?—Three o’clock.

  When did the riot begin? Shortly after four.

  What were you doing between three and four?—I was in the class for
  practising physic.

  When did it come out?—A few minutes before four.

  Was there a mob of students at the gate?

  Mr. Shand—Your lordship will understand that I am objecting to all
  these questions.

  The Lord Advocate—Were you present during the whole of the riot?

  Mr. Shand—I object to that question.

  Lord Mure sustained the objection.”

In addressing the jury, Mr. Shand said,

  “A slander had been committed and was unrepented, and only by a
  verdict from the jury could the calumny be wiped off. A nominal sum,
  however, would be an injury instead of an assistance. Excessive
  damages[80] he did not ask, but only such a reasonable sum as would
  mark their sense of the injury inflicted on the pursuer by the
  statements made in his absence.”

Footnote 80:

  The amount claimed—£1000—was only specified when the case came into
  Court, having been inadvertently omitted from the issue.

The Lord Advocate’s summing up was humorous in the extreme, and called
forth peals of laughter at the pursuer’s expense; indeed in the end he
almost went so far as to produce a counter-wave of sympathy for the
victim of his brilliant raillery. But, indeed, nothing could be made of
the case as it stood.

In the final summing-up, Lord Mure said:

  “He had not allowed any evidence to prove that the pursuer had been a
  leader in the riot, because, according to his view of the authorities
  on the subject, it was incompetent to allow such evidence in the
  absence of an issue of justification. The jury had heard the evidence
  of Dr. Christison and others as to the injury which a man’s character
  was calculated to sustain from such a statement as had been made use
  of by the defender; and it was for the jury to judge whether that
  charge was one which was likely, without retractation or apology, to
  injure the pursuer’s character.

  The jury retired at five o’clock, and at half-past six they returned
  to Court, and gave a unanimous verdict in favour of the pursuer,
  assessing the damages at a farthing.”[81]

Footnote 81:

  Edinburgh _Evening Courant_, June 1, 1871.

On the following day a leading article in the _Glasgow Herald_ made the
following comment:

  “Miss Blake has not pled or proved the substantial truth of her
  accusations. She has preferred to challenge Mr. C. to prove their
  falsehood. We are altogether unable to understand why he should not
  have accepted the challenge, and why he omitted to deny the charges
  levelled against him. We cannot see how he could have expected a jury
  to give him substantial damages for his injured reputation when he
  refused to allow any enquiry into the circumstances in which he stood.
  The witnesses who were present on the occasion of the riot were not
  allowed to say whether they saw Mr. C. present at the riot, whether he
  took part in it, or what he said or did on the occasion if he was
  present. Miss Jex-Blake is accordingly very properly fined one
  farthing for her rash and libellous statements, and the public is left
  to wonder for what earthly reason Mr. C. brought his action. It has
  only one compensation for the loss of time involved in reading the
  evidence in a trial which has established nothing. Miss Jex-Blake has
  completely vindicated the title of her sex to aspire to the highest
  honours not merely in medicine but in law. She has shown herself a
  perfect mistress of the art of self defence. In no cricket field this
  season have there been so many dangerous balls admirably stopped, and
  so many badly bowled ones dexterously played. If the witness and the
  counsel could have interchanged positions, the change might possibly
  have had considerable effect upon the fortunes of Mr. C.”[82]

Footnote 82:

  “Of course, as you know, I daresay,” writes Professor Jack to S. J.-B.
  about this time, “all the articles that appear in the _Herald_ are
  mine, and especially the good ones.”

But the end was not yet. It was still possible for the Bench to make S.
J.-B. responsible for the entire costs of the case, and in due time she
was called upon to pay—in addition to the farthing damages—a bill of
£915 11s. 1d.

Let it be recorded at once that her brother promptly redeemed his
promise, and sent a cheque for half the amount.

As soon as the decision of the Court was made known, one of the jurymen
expressed his feelings in a letter to the _Scotsman_:

                                              “Edinburgh, July 1871.

  SIR,—As one of the jurymen before whom this case was tried, I am
  extremely disappointed to observe from the papers that the Court have
  found the pursuer entitled to his expenses.

  I have been anxiously looking forward to the determination of the
  case, in the hope that the verdict of the jury would be so applied as
  to receive the effect which they intended by it.

  The jury were of the opinion that the pursuer should have submitted
  some evidence to them of his non-participation in the disgraceful
  riot, of which Miss Jex-Blake had so much reason to complain, to have
  entitled him to a verdict; and they would have made some
  representation to the presiding Judge on the subject had it been
  possible to do so.

  After retiring, the first thing done was to appoint a foreman. This
  gentleman turned out to be in favour of a verdict for the defender.
  With the view of ascertaining the mind of the rest of the jury, he
  asked us individually to write down on pieces of paper whether we were
  for ‘libel’ or ‘no libel’. The result was an equal division—six for
  finding that there was a libel, and six for no libel. This was done a
  second time with the same result. In this predicament, and after
  considerable discussion as to the amount of damages, in the course of
  which I don’t think a larger sum than one shilling was even mentioned,
  even by those who thought there had been a libel, it was proposed to
  ask the Court whether the foreman had a casting-vote. This was done,
  and the Clerk came back and told us he had not. We then asked the
  Clerk whether we were entitled to find for the pursuer without giving
  any damages, and he told us we were not. Shortly after, we again sent
  for the Clerk, and enquired whether a farthing of damages would carry
  expenses against the defender. He stood a while, and said there was
  some new Act which provided that a farthing of damages would not carry
  expenses.

  He went out to consult the Judge; but, having got this information
  from him, we agreed upon our verdict, and rung the bell for the macer
  at once. I had no doubt of the soundness of the Clerk’s opinion, and
  in that belief I concurred in the verdict finding the pursuer entitled
  to one farthing of damages. I certainly would not have done so, had I
  for a moment anticipated the result which has happened. I think the
  case a very hard one for the defender, more especially when, but for
  the opinion given by the Clerk, the verdict might have been in her
  favour. I think it is due to her that the public should be informed of
  the circumstances under which the verdict was given, for it seems a
  very illogical result to affirm that the pursuer had suffered no
  damage by the alleged slander, or, at least damage of only one
  farthing, and at the same time to compel the defender to pay a large
  sum for expenses, especially when the origin of the whole matter was a
  riot in which the ladies were so badly used.—I am, etc.

                                                         A JURYMAN.”

This letter was followed by one from a lawyer:

                                          “Edinburgh, July 12, 1871.

  SIR,—I am not surprised at the letter in your publication of to-day,
  of a ‘A Juryman’ in the above case. The Clerk of Court was _in
  substance_ correct in his statement to the jury that by a recent Act
  of Parliament the pursuer in an action of damages is not entitled to
  expenses if the verdict is for less than £5, but he was wrong in not
  at the same time informing them of the discretion still left to the
  Court....

  But the thing that strikes me most forcibly in the juryman’s statement
  is how came it that a Clerk of Court was allowed to speak to the jury
  at all on such a matter. The public are indebted to the juryman for
  making this known, because it at once explains what was intended by
  the verdict. I do not think in the circumstances the verdict is worth
  anything, and I would strongly advise Miss Jex-Blake to appeal the
  case, and have the verdict set aside on the ground either of the
  Clerk’s interference, or that the decision of the Judges is wrong.
  Certainly the decision on the matter of expenses is very
  unsatisfactory to the legal profession, especially as it was given
  without the usual statement of the grounds of judgment.

                            I am, etc.,
                                                          A LAWYER.”

It remained for Miss Pechey to give her views on the practical outcome
of the case. Poor little Hope Scholar! She had travelled far since the
days when she had refused to “appeal” because she was better employed in
listening to the nightingales.

                                              “Edinburgh, July 13th.

  SIR,—I see that a juryman has written to you to say how very ill the
  recent decision as to the costs agrees with the intentions of the
  jury, and a lawyer has made clear how extraordinary it is in point of
  law. Will you allow me to say a few words, from personal experience,
  on the practical results?

  The medical students of Edinburgh have received a hint by which some
  of them seem well inclined to profit. They have been told pretty
  plainly that it is possible that there should be a riot got up for the
  express purpose of insulting women, for one of the very women insulted
  to be accused of libel when she complains of such conduct, and then
  for the insulters to escape scot-free, and the complainer to be
  mulcted in expenses. In fact the moral seems to be that, unless a
  woman is willing to be saddled with costs to the amount of several
  hundred pounds, she had better resolve to submit to every kind of
  insult, without even allowing herself to mention the facts.

  I say that some of the students appear to have taken the hint so
  given; for to this I must think is due the treatment received by
  myself and some of my friends if we happen to meet students on our way
  home in the evening. It will possibly strike some people as
  sufficiently extraordinary that a knot of young men should find
  pleasure in following a woman through the streets, and should take
  advantage of her being alone to shout after her all the foulest
  epithets in their voluminous vocabulary of abuse; yet such is the
  case. I am quite aware that it would be useless to represent to those
  students the injury they do to the University and to the medical
  profession in the eyes of the public, because neither of these
  considerations would weigh with them for a moment; but it may make
  some impression on them to be told that the effect of their conduct is
  really such as they would least desire. Dr. Christison is reported to
  have said during his examination in Court, that he considered the riot
  of November to be ‘a great misfortune,’ and from his point of view he
  was undoubtedly right. If the wish of these students is to bar our
  progress, and frighten us from the prosecution of the work we have
  taken in hand, I venture to say never was a greater mistake made. Each
  fresh insult is an additional incentive to finish the work begun. I
  began the study of medicine merely from personal motives; now I am
  also impelled by the desire to remove women from the care of such
  young ruffians. I am quite aware that respectable students will say,
  and say truly, that these are the dregs of the profession, and that
  they will never take a high place as respectable practitioners. Such
  is doubtless the case; but what then? Simply that, instead of having
  the medical charge of ladies with rich husbands and fathers, to whom,
  from self-interest, they would be respectful, they will have the
  treatment of unprotected servants and shop-girls. I should be very
  sorry to see any poor girl under the care (!) of such men as those,
  for instance, who the other night followed me through the street,
  using medical terms to make the disgusting purport of their language
  more intelligible to me. When a man can put his scientific knowledge
  to such degraded use, it seems to me he cannot sink much lower.

  How far the recent decisions are calculated to arrest or discourage
  such conduct, I leave the public to judge.—I am, etc.

                                                 MARY EDITH PECHEY.”

One is glad to note that the _Lancet_ now took fire:

  “Common candour must compel any unprejudiced person to admit that the
  fight has been pursued by the orthodox party _per fas et nefas_, and
  that the ill-advised conduct of grave and learned seniors in the
  profession has offered only too plausible an excuse to the heated
  blood of younger partisans to indulge in coarse excesses.”

It would be wrong to make too much of this ebullition of wickedness from
the hearts of “ill-led” boys; but we must not forget that the women were
scarcely more than girls, unable to view these things as calmly as we
view them now; and all these experiences went to make them the thing
they became.

For the iron entered into their souls.

Thirty years later one of their number—a married woman and a physician
of standing—was heard to say that on her occasional visits to Edinburgh,
she would make a détour of miles rather than pass the gates of Surgeons’
Hall.

“Would you _really_?” said S. J.-B.




                               CHAPTER X
                     SOME FRIENDSHIPS AND HOLIDAYS


Of course S. J.-B. was not allowed to pay one penny of her expenses. The
amount was subscribed, and more than subscribed, by sympathizers all
over the United Kingdom in the course of a few weeks; and her brother’s
cheque was duly returned. It would almost seem as if nothing had done so
much to excite public interest and fellow-feeling as that unfortunate
speech and the lawsuit to which it led. The very names of those who
undertook to receive subscriptions gave a striking indication of the
challenge of popular sympathy.[83]

Footnote 83:

  Mrs. Hill Burton, Rev. Professor Calderwood, Treasurer Colston, J. R.
  Findlay, Esq., David Greig, Esq., Mrs. Hope of Drylaw, Miss Agnes
  M‘Laren, Mrs. Nichol, Admiral Sir W. Ramsay, K.C.B., Miss L.
  Stevenson, and R. S. Wyld, Esq.

There was no lack of criticism and condemnation, of course; the move and
countermove went on; but hundreds of letters poured in, bearing witness,
not only to the width, but to the depth, of the feeling called forth.
Miss Frances Power Cobbe’s impulsive beginning,—“I want words to express
my indignation,—” was typical of many. Harriet Martineau, too, was a
subscriber and a cordial sympathizer.[84]

Footnote 84:

  “If you, as the honoured and trusted representative of us working
  women, are insulted for us all, the grosser the insult, the more
  secure you must be of sympathy and gratitude from increasing
  multitudes of individuals, and of the adoption of our cause as a
  practical aim by the best part of society in our day.”

A number of subscriptions were returned after the full amount was
raised, and many people expressed their disappointment at hearing of the
fund only through the announcement that it was closed. “I wish it would
open again,” wrote the Revd. Professor Charteris, “even if it were only
a little chink.”

Here are two very different letters that one is glad to put on record:

                                              “Inverness, Aug. 3/71.

  DEAR MISS STEVENSON,[85]

  Assuredly _no man_ could calmly read Miss Jex-Blake’s case, out of or
  in Court. And, could I do so publicly, I would cast from me with
  _loathing_ all my once valued connexions with the Edinr. Colleges of
  Physicians and Surgeons; to show my utter disgust at (with a few
  honourable exceptions) their unmanly brutal conduct towards Miss Blake
  and her friends.

  On the 9th (D.V.) I shall be in Edinburgh, when I shall call for or
  write to you. On that day, I hope to get some help from absent friends
  to add to the mite of

                             Yours faithfully,
                                                 J. MACKENZIE, M.D.”

Footnote 85:

  Miss Louisa Stevenson and Mrs. Henry Kingsley had kindly undertaken to
  be Hon. Treasurers of the fund.

                                             “33 Richmond Place,
                                          Edinburgh, 24th Aug. 1871.

  MADAM,

  I beg to enclose a P.O.O. for eight shillings. This small sum is
  subscribed by a few working men in aid of the fund for defraying the
  Law expences so unjustly thrust upon Miss Jex-Blake for simply
  speaking the truth in her own defence in a Straightforward Manner.
  They deeply sympathise with this lady in the noble struggle she is
  making for Womens right to a liberal education and remunerative
  employment. May she be of good cheer, of good courage, and continue
  steadfast unto the end.

                             I am, Madam,
                                      Your obedient Servant,
                                                         JAMES GRAY.

  P.S. If this subscription be advertised please put it, A few working
  men—8s. It is payable at the Nicholson Street Post Office.

  Miss A. M‘Laren.”

There was almost always an element of comic relief, too, about these
tragic and moving situations. The following letter was one of those
which provided it in this case:

                                          “58 Altom Street,
                                              Blackburn, 15 Aug./71.

     MISS JEX-BLAKE,

    DEAR MADAM,

        Although a complete stranger to you I have long been familiar
  with your name, and also with your efforts to open the Edinburgh
  University to Ladies. I understand that you have been in America, you
  will therefore be familiar with many of the Colleges and Universities
  there. My wife who is in full practice here has studied Medicine in
  the Hygeio-Therapeutic Medical College and has obtained her M.D.
  Degree from the same College. As I am able to influence the Degree of
  M.D. to either Ladies or Gentlemen who are able to satisfy me as to
  their fitness to practise Medicine, I thought I would communicate with
  you, as probably an American degree would answer your purpose until it
  is possible to procure one from an English or Scotch University.

  After all, it is not the degree but the ability of a Medical
  practitioner that should be appreciated....”

Truly: but the law has something to say about the signing of death
certificates, the registration of lunatics, the recovery of fees, and
other incidental details. More strawberry jam labels!

The cheque, for over £1000, was presented to S. J.-B. at a public
meeting, when there was a large gathering of influential citizens, the
faithful Lord Provost occupying the chair. When all expenses were fully
paid, a balance remained of over £100, which S. J.-B. asked leave to add
to an already existing “nest-egg” for the purpose of founding a future
hospital for women officered by women.

The immediate struggle with the University was not made any easier,
however, though the “Cause” was gaining ground by strides all over the
rest of the world. The _Scotsman_ continued to give a wholesome lead to
the press: indeed no woman gained scholastic or other honours anywhere
without having her name and achievement duly registered with an implicit
_Verb. sap._ at the end of the paragraph.

One is glad to record, too, that one or two delightful holidays relieved
the strain of this year’s work. Mrs. Thorne was proving herself a most
valuable representative, not comparably so well versed as S. J.-B. in
all the _minutiae_ of the conflict, but certainly less exacting and
easier to work with.

Considering the stem from which she sprang—a Tory family of landed
gentry—S. J.-B. as prophetess had a surprising amount of honour in her
own house. Her conservative old friend, Lady Waldegrave, had written a
quite touching letter of appreciation in April of this year; and her
Norfolk uncle and aunt, the Revd. Thomas and Mrs. Gunton actually
subscribed to the cause and allowed their names to be put on her
Committee, though Mrs. Gunton had postponed reading the papers bearing
on the subject for some time, from fear that she and her husband would
be constrained to refuse.

“How ANY WOMAN can have a desire for the Medical Profession is indeed
WONDERFUL,” she writes, “but of course only very talented ones could go
through the stiff examinations that are required.”

She remarks too, with complacence, that men doctors will be kept up to
the mark when they have to compete against women.

In some remote part of Norfolk, Mrs. Jex-Blake gave her name in a shop,
whereupon “a lady stepped forward and said what good work you were
doing, but, if we were English, we must think very ill of the _Scotch_.
I said No, you had received far more kindness than unkindness, having
had a great many real and warm friends.”

This incident leads one to note that the present year, 1871, saw the
ripening into lifelong friendship of S. J.-B.’s acquaintance with Miss
Agnes M‘Laren, daughter of the Member for Edinburgh,—a lady who adds one
more to the gallery of truly noble women with whom we are brought into
contact when reviewing S. J.-B.’s life. At the time of “the Edinburgh
Fight,” Miss M‘Laren was engaged in Suffrage work with Miss Taylour,
acting as Hon. Secretary to the Association (with no paid subordinate to
do the drudgery), travelling on occasion all over Scotland in serious
propagation of her principles.[86] She was perhaps the most public-
spirited member of a public-spirited family, for the reason that in her
the strong purpose, shrewd judgment and liberal sympathies that
characterized all, were combined with an instinctive aloofness and even
shyness, with a spirit almost of quietism, with a real old-world grace
of womanhood.

Footnote 86:

  It is interesting to note that at this time almost all public-spirited
  women thought the suffrage would be granted before the right to a
  medical education. They had so nearly got it more than once! “You will
  accomplish nothing,” S. J-B. was sometimes told, “until we get the
  vote.” And one is grimly amused to find her expressing a serious fear
  that the suffrage may be granted before she has had an opportunity of
  hearing her friend, Miss M‘Laren, speak in support of it. She need
  have entertained no undue apprehension on this score.

She was hailed with something like reverence by the work-worn, hard-
driven students at 15 Buccleuch Place, and almost from the first they
spoke of her among themselves as “St. Agnes,” a name to which she
characteristically took exception as soon as it reached her ears.

  “DEAR MISS M‘LAREN,” writes S. J.-B. in this connection,—

  “You can’t seriously suppose that anybody in this house,—least of all
  that I,—should really laugh at you!—though I don’t doubt that you are
  a great deal too humble-minded to understand in the least the sort of
  light in which most of us working women do regard you. However we’ll
  keep our pet name for you to ourselves if you don’t like it.”

And again a few weeks later:

                                           “15 Buccleuch Place,
                                                Edinburgh. June 7th.

  DEAR MISS M‘LAREN,

        Though we all miss you here almost daily, I am unselfish enough
  to be heartily glad that you are going to Germany. I am sure the
  change of air and scene must do you good, and the chestnut trees at
  Heidelberg must be simply lovely now.

  When you get to the top and sit and look down at the valley of the
  Neckar, you may picture me (as a lonely English teacher at Mannheim)
  going over there on Sundays to church, and climbing to that brow to
  enjoy the setting sun and the infinite peacefulness and beauty of the
  whole scene.

  I only _wish_ I could be there with you!—If you stay at all at
  Mannheim, do go and see my old school, the ‘Grossherzogliches
  Institut’—I think they will still remember my name there,—and I should
  like so much to hear news of them. They would be electrified to hear
  of me as a doctor.

  I finished up by having scarlet fever there, and shocked them all by
  refusing to submit to the stupid old German regimen of starvation and
  shut windows!...

  I do most heartily wish you a pleasant journey and great rest and
  refreshment in it. Do you know that when I got your letter such a
  longing came over me to see the Rhine again that for a moment I almost
  thought of asking if you would take me with you, but five minutes
  reflection showed me how wrong and foolish it would be for me to leave
  home just now in the midst of term, and with these ‘appeals’ still
  undecided, and with my petition to the Senatus coming on! But it _was_
  a huge temptation all the same!”

This brings us back to the diary:

  “Monday June 5th. The trial over at last. ‘Farthing damages’
  satisfactory, I suppose.

  But I so weary! If I could but get a month’s real rest! I wake feeling
  driven,—I get through nothing all day, and I lie down tired out at
  night.

  Wednesday, June 7th. Sur ces entrefaites (as my present neighbours
  would say) came a letter from St. Agnes saying she was to go to
  Heidelberg on Saturday for three weeks. Instantly—Why shouldn’t I go
  with her, quoth the Infantine.

  Fifty reasons, quoth the Estimable,—law, money, study, Senatus, etc.,
  etc.

  Telling Pussy[87] of the temptation overcome, came a proposal to
  ‘treat Resolution,’ urged by her, E.P., and even Mrs. Thorne.

Footnote 87:

    The name by which Miss Louisa Stevenson was affectionately known in
    the little circle.

  Millar [lawyer] said I could be spared.

  So Thursday went to London with L. and F. Stevenson,... Good journey.
  Slept at Hampstead.

  Sunday 11th. Morning Stopford Brooke, St. James Chapel, York Street.
  Stood till sermon, then pulpit stairs....

It might almost have been predicted that S. J.-B. would not pass through
Paris in a time of peace. The visit was destined to prove exciting
enough. She just dashes down a few polyglot jottings in her diary to
serve as stepping-stones for memory later on:

  Tuesday 13th. Reached Paris about 6.30. No cabs, no apparent chance of
  any. At length in streets 2-seated fiacre, drove to [Hotel]
  Folkestone, was deposited, C. M‘L.[88] returning for others.

Footnote 88:

    Mr. Charles M‘Laren (now Lord Aberconway) and Mr. Walter M‘Laren
    were of the party.

  Friday 16th. Writing all above (from 7th. onwards) by open window of
  Hotel F.—rain falling on market outside. They not back from
  Versailles, where gone in hope of hearing Assemblé, etc.

  Wednesday. After long trudge found ‘voiture de grande remise’ 4 frs.
  the hour, drove by Luxembourg, Notre Dame, Sainte Chapelle, etc. (Not
  allowed to lift written scrap from street from heap of ruins by side
  of Palais de Justice.) Great order and quiet everywhere and civility.

  Pantheon dinted with ‘obus’. Hotel de Ville gutted, (with all
  registers, etc.)—Tuileries, and Palais de Justice Ditto. Ministère de
  Finances even more utterly in ruins, and houses here and there,—e.g.
  in Rue Royale by Madeleine and elsewhere.

  Hotel de Clugny incendie but unhurt. All along streets notice holes to
  cellars stopped up with plaster for fear of petroleum.

  Thursday. Drove by Champs Elysées, to Champ de Mars, Porte de Neuilly
  (where such destruction from bombs, etc., vault of railway crashed
  in,—trees in splinters, etc.) Then by Quaies, into Place de Carrousel
  between Tuileries and Louvre to Bastille Column and (through bad parts
  of town ...) to Père la Chaise, with its horrible trenches filled with
  hundreds of bodies and soaked black with petroleum (clothes, etc.,
  burnt over them?).

  Then that ghastly corner where 250 and 140 (‘4, 5 femmes,’) were shot
  ‘en pleine vigueur’ crying ‘Vive la République!’ as a keen young
  fossier told with evident sympathy, he having had to stand by,—see the
  firing, and bury the results.

  Today Friday, 16th. The Petit Moniteur gives a horrible circular (torn
  down last night in the Rue Rochechouard) inciting ‘Travailleurs from
  every country to join against priests, soldiers and tyrants, and
  succeed, or nous nous ensevelirons sous les ruines de Paris!’

  Fancy crying for fresh bloodshed when steeped in it to the lips now!

  Some Frenchwomen at table curiously indignant at our small care about
  English ‘communists’,—quite unable to understand how the solidarity of
  national sentiment made such as these late events impossible in
  England, and then, when I mildly said so, shooting at me:—‘Pourtant,
  la Révolution où on a tué votre roi!’!!”

  “Monday 20th. Went to Versailles to see the Chambre;—unpunctual
  sitting, I only present during some minutes of debate. Given ticket in
  ‘D’ by President Grévy.

  6.30. Left Paris via Dieppe. 8 hours roughish sea.

  Tuesday. Brighton.”

So there was no Heidelberg after all,—no sitting on the brow of the hill
to look down on the valley of the Neckar, and recall _ces jours heureux
où nous étions si misérables_. We are not told why S.J.-B.’s holiday was
cut so short: perhaps railway communication was broken for the moment,
and it proved impossible to proceed: but in any case it may be that the
intense and unexpected picture of carnage and strife served to take her
more completely out of herself and her worries than the more peaceful
experience she would have chosen.

Moreover a real holiday was in store that Autumn, a holiday brightened
by a visit from Dr. Lucy Sewall. How much this meant to her one gathers
from the following letter, written about this date:

  “MY DARLING,

  I am so sorry for your loss of poor little Scamper,—I have got a
  splendid big ‘Collie’ for you here,—the handsomest I ever saw,—if you
  can take him back with you. If, that is, you _must_ go back; but, oh,
  Lucy, I do _so_ wish you would stay with us here for a few years.

  People are getting wild for women doctors here,—and you might make
  almost any income, and do quite incalculable good by living here for
  the next five years.

  We have eleven women studying here now, and absolutely no one to give
  them [adequate] uterine teaching!

  This morning I had a quite spontaneous offer of £200 to help found a
  Women’s Hospital here, and I believe that in a week I could get ten
  times that amount promised.

  You should organize everything exactly as you liked, and, republican
  wretch as you are, you would be a sort of Queen among us,—and, what
  you would care for much more, would do quite infinite good to
  everybody concerned,—ladies, poor women, students, and all.

  However, you shan’t be bothered or worried. I think the strongest
  argument of all will be when you see for yourself how sorely we need
  you.

  I shall not make any definite plans for you till after you come. If
  you like to stay quietly in Scotland all the time, we will do so, or I
  will go with you to Zurich or Paris or anywhere you like.... Send me
  early word of the steamer by which you expect to come, and, if at all
  possible, I will meet you at Liverpool....

  I send you another copy of my Suffrage speech, and hope you have
  received the newspapers about the trial.

                               Your very aff.
                                                         S. L. J.-B.

  Turk has put on mourning for Scamper,—crape round his left arm, as
  they do in the army. He evidently quite understands, for he doesn’t
  try to get it off....”

The reader will not need to be told that S. J.-B. went out on the tender
to meet her friend at Liverpool,—“after awful rush previous day with
Surgeons’ Hall, leader, etc.”

Dr. Sewall’s choice of a holiday, happily, was a quiet time, mainly in
Perthshire; but, straight from Liverpool, the two fellow-workers went to
Shipley to see Mrs. Unwin, whose health had been failing for some time.

The friendship between S. J.-B. and her fellow student had never
flagged. S. J.-B. had paid repeated visits to the Yorkshire home, where
husband and wife vied with each other in the warmth of their welcome,
and where both had proved most loyal advocates and upholders of the new
Cause. More than once when a petition was being got ready for Parliament
on the subject of the medical education of women, Mrs. Unwin had proved
herself a keen and successful canvasser for signatures in her
neighbourhood, throwing into the scale that weight of personal
popularity which is so important a factor in the achievement of any aim.
She had even paid a visit to the beehive at 15 Buccleuch Place, to be
made much of by the workers, and to be not a little impressed by the
sight of such divers and strenuous activities.

And now she was ill, and S. J.-B. was perfectly sure that, if anyone
could bring healing, it was “the little doctor.”

Fresh courage they brought indeed, a little fresh lease of life in which
the sufferer recovered strength and proved a renewed source of comfort
to husband and children before she was called hence out of their sight;
but healing in this world was not to be. _Dis aliter visum._

                  *       *       *       *       *

In other respects the holiday was a refreshing one. It included
attendance at a meeting of the British Association—great joy for Dr.
Sewall—and a stay at an old Perthshire farmhouse, which, to many other
attractions in S. J.-B.’s eyes, added the crowning one of a ghost,—a
ghost which was visible to the dogs, and abundantly audible to herself
and Miss Du Pre, though it failed subsequently to make any impression on
the representatives of the Society for Psychical Research.

From the farmhouse as a centre they made delightful excursions, the germ
of many subsequent driving-tours in Perthshire, and it was on this
occasion that the roadside inn at Fortingal was discovered, with its
restful surroundings, cosy interior, and omelettes that constituted a
positive object in life to the healthy holiday-maker!

After a farewell visit to Mrs. Unwin, Dr. Sewall sailed for Boston in
September, parting from S. J.-B. on the tender at Liverpool. Her “log”
was a lengthy one, full of wise observations and reflection, and every
word of it was written for S. J.-B....

  “MY DEAR ONE,

        ... I have been thinking last night that if you and I could ever
  practise together, we ought to do better than either alone, for you
  have many qualities in which I am wanting. I think if we were
  together, you would write a valuable book, and so give the world a
  higher idea of women doctors. I know I shall never succeed in writing
  a good book by myself.

  It hardly seems worth while to make you read all my fancies, but it
  seems to bring you nearer to me while I am writing, and the days are
  so long and lonely here.”

  “When I lie awake nights and think of you wanting me to help you in
  Edinburgh, it seems to me as if I must break off from all my ties, and
  come back to you at once; but then my New England conscience wakes up
  and tells me that my life must be duty and not pleasure, and I try to
  be contented with doing the work that God gives me, and trust that
  when I am really at work it will be all right.

  I do hope that you are having a nice quiet time with Miss Du Pre, and
  getting rested.”

  “It is just a week now since I said Goodbye to you, but it seems
  almost like a month to me. Last night for the first time since I left,
  I dreamed of having patients instead of dreaming of you.”




                               CHAPTER XI
                THE QUESTION OF PROFESSIONAL EXAMINATION


Apart from the ghost—which was a pure joy, though a very exciting one—S.
J.-B.’s holiday was broken in upon by very disturbing rumours.

It was whispered by some of those who might have been supposed to know,
that—notwithstanding the paragraphs that still stood in the _University
Calendar_ (see p. 260)—an effort would be made to prevent any new women
candidates from undergoing the Preliminary Examination, and from
matriculating. Worse than this, it was hinted that a similar effort
would be made to prevent the women who had been studying for that
express purpose for two years, from presenting themselves for the First
Professional Examination.

There were positive difficulties apart from these vague rumours. In a
previous chapter we saw that the President of the Royal College of
Physicians and the President of the Royal College of Surgeons had
refused to preside at the prize-giving “if lady students were to be
present and to receive their prizes on that occasion.” This announcement
was followed by a decision on the part of the lecturers at Surgeons’
Hall “to rescind the permission given last summer to those lecturers who
desired to admit ladies to their classes,”—“it being, however,
understood that the prohibition should not extend to the instructions by
Dr. Keiller [in Midwifery] and others, of women who were not registered
students of medicine.”

It was still open to the women, of course, to get Extra-Mural lecturers
to teach them elsewhere, if rooms could be found and the necessary
arrangements made; but, as regarded the original students, an automatic
deadlock arose at this point of which certain Professors unhappily
elected to avail themselves:

By the rules of the University only four classes might be taken from
Extra-Mural (non-professorial) teachers, and the original students had
already taken these four. Professor Christison’s class was one of those
that came next in turn, and it would, perhaps, have been expecting too
much of human nature that he should have chosen this moment in which to
lay down his arms. In any case, he refused point blank.

In this dilemma, the women appealed to the Senatus,—(1) to appoint
special University lecturers (assistants to the Professors or others)
whose payment the women would guarantee; or (2) alternatively, to relax,
in the case of the women, the ordinary regulations, so that they might
take an increased number of Extra-Mural classes.

Counsel’s opinion was taken by the Senatus as to the powers of the
University in this respect, and, an opinion adverse to the wishes of the
women having been received, the Senatus decided by a majority of one to
take no action in the matter.

Promptly S. J.-B. and her Committee submitted the facts to other counsel
(the Lord Advocate and Sheriff Fraser) and received the opinion (1) that
it was quite competent to the University authorities to make any
necessary provision for the completion of the ladies’ education: and (2)
that the Medical Faculty were bound to admit the ladies to professional
examination on the subjects in which they were already qualified to
pass.

This latter point was included with special reference to the incredible
rumours referred to above.

As the day of the examinations drew near and nothing happened, the
leaders among the women began to feel reassured. The following letters,
however, show how well-founded their fears were:

  “Private.

                                                         Oct. 2. 71.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I shall be at the Senatus any day you like, unless prevented by
  something of which I have no present prospect.

  I was glad to hear, from my wife, ... that Mr. Fraser has given you a
  favourable opinion. His view that the Professors are _bound_ to teach
  all persons who present Matriculation tickets to them, is what I have
  always held, and I believe often expressed to you. In the same way I
  should say, they are bound to examine them. What you must do now,
  then, I fancy, is to present your Mat: tickets and class fees and
  _demand_ class tickets, and present your Certificates, etc., and
  _demand_ Examination, and, on either or both being refused, claim a
  legal remedy. If possible you ought to go to the Court of Session and
  not to the University Court; and to the 2nd Division, if you have to
  go beyond the Lord Ordinary. Moncrieff will be much influenced by
  Fraser’s opinion, whereas Inglis will be influenced, if at all, in the
  wrong direction. As Chancellor, however, I should think he would
  himself decline to sit as a Judge in a case which may come before him
  in the former capacity.

  With kind regards from Mrs. Lorimer, believe me,

                                Yours very truly,
                                                        J. LORIMER.”

                                “16 Charlotte Square,
                                         Edinburgh.
                                            Friday, Oct. 13th. 1871.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        ... I should very much like to see the legal opinion you have
  obtained upon the point of legal responsibility as incurred by the
  University Court in their pragmatic sanction of the lady students
  matriculating and passing their preliminary examination.

  A legal opinion depends so entirely upon the manner in which the
  matter is laid before counsel, and usually leaves so many loopholes
  for escape unperceived by a non-professional eye, that I am always
  jealous of such opinions unless the interpretation thereof is given by
  someone of good common sense and legal experience....

  I shall be at home tomorrow (Saturday) evening at 7.40 p.m. when it
  will give me the greatest pleasure to see you, if that will suit your
  convenience.

  Is it true that Mrs. de Lacy Evans is engaged to Mr. Russel of the
  Scotsman?!!!

                              Most faithfully yours,
                                              PATRICK HERON WATSON.”

Here is a significant little letter, too, from the Secretary to the
University:

                                                 “Inveresk. Oct. 13.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

  I have instructed Mr. Gilbert[89] to receive the money [for the First
  Professional Examn.] and give the customary acknowledgments, so that
  you may be all right with the Dean.

  I am bound to call a meeting of Senatus upon a requisition signed by 3
  Professors. Secure a day likely to suit your friends. Saturday is not
  a good day generally, and on Friday 2 or 3 are coming down here to
  dine,—at least they are asked to do so.

  How would Thursday or Monday do?

                              Yours truly,
                                                       JOHN WILSON.”

Footnote 89:

  Clerk of the University.

That afternoon, we are told, there was a “furious row” in the Medical
Faculty, and a day or two later each of the women candidates for the
First Professional Examination received a copy of the following letter:

                                     “University of Edinburgh,
                                                 October 14th, 1871.

  MADAM,

        I am instructed by the Medical Faculty to inform you that your
  name and your fees have been received in error by the Clerk of the
  University as a candidate for the first professional examination
  during the present month, but that the Faculty cannot receive you for
  such examination without the sanction of the Senatus Academicus.

                        I am, Madam,
                                Your obedient servant,
                                         J. H. BALFOUR,
                                       Dean of the Medical Faculty.”

Two days later S. J.-B. received the following letter with reference to
the Preliminary Examination:

                            “University of Edinburgh, Oct. 16. 1871.

  MADAM,

        I am desired by the Dean of the Medical Faculty to inform you
  that he has been interdicted by the Faculty from giving examination
  papers to ladies on the 17th and 18th curt.

  Kindly communicate this fact to the ladies whose names you some time
  ago handed in to me for this examination.

                                       I am, etc.,
                                                    THOMAS GILBERT.”

It will be noticed that the letter was dated on the day previous to that
on which the examination was to take place. Three ladies had come—or
were on their way—from various parts of the kingdom to submit to it. If
they were not allowed to enter, they would be thrown back in their
professional studies for a whole year.

Most women—and men—would have sat down under this blow. S. J.-B. went
straight to her solicitor and took him with her to see the advocate (Mr.
Fraser). The following is a copy of the letter that was sent by them to
the Dean of the Medical Faculty:

                                  “Chambers, 8 Bank Street,
                                         Edinburgh. Oct. 16th. 1871.

  DEAR SIR,

          We have been instructed to obtain the opinion of counsel with
  reference to the legality of your refusal to admit ladies to the
  Preliminary Examination in Arts, which will take place tomorrow.

  We beg now to enclose the memorial submitted, and the opinion given
  thereon by Mr. Patrick Fraser, for your perusal, and request that you
  will, at your earliest convenience, return them to us.

  We beg to point out that you are individually responsible if the
  refusal is persisted in, and that we have been instructed, in that
  case, to raise actions for damages against you at the instance of each
  of the memorialists. You will also observe that the instructions of
  the Medical Faculty, being in themselves illegal, will be no defence
  against such actions.

  We trust that you will, in these circumstances, reconsider the matter,
  and see fit to retract the refusal, and prevent the necessity of
  further proceedings.

                              We are, etc.,
                                    MILLAR, ALLARDICE & ROBSON, W.S.

     Professor Balfour, M.D.,
  Dean of the Medical Faculty.”

There was no loss of time in receiving the reply:

                     “University of Edinburgh, Oct. 16th., 1871.[90]

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have received the legal notice from your solicitor. Under
  these circumstances I shall not take the responsibility of refusing
  the ladies admission to the preliminary examination as heretofore. But
  I must inform you that I admit them provisionally until the matter is
  decided by the proper authorities, and without prejudice as regards
  myself.

                          I am, etc.,
                                                     J. H. BALFOUR.”

Footnote 90:

  The dates of these three letters are correctly given. They were all
  delivered by hand.

So the ladies were duly examined in the ordinary course.

On applying for Matriculation tickets, however, they were informed by
the clerk that the Principal of the University had written him word
that, in consequence of representations made to him by Professor
Christison, no ladies were at present to be allowed to matriculate. “Of
course,” said a friendly professor, “the Principal had no more authority
to issue this decree than had the janitor.”

In this case, fortunately, there was time to call a meeting of Senatus,
as referred to by Professor Wilson above (letter of October 13), and the
necessary requisition was signed by Professors Crum Brown, Tait, and
Liston.

  [Diary.] “Tuesday 17th. Preliminary examination all right,—Mundy,
  Dahms, and Miller. Dr. Alex. Wood takes Motion in General Council.

  Thursday, 19th. Leader written yesterday, in proof today. I, oh, so
  tired! Settled about motions in Senatus. Med. Fac. want Lord
  Advocate’s opinion,—seem shaking in their shoes.

  Ah, we _will_ win,—but the price!”

Poor little Despotic Emperor! Where was her Sackermena?

             “It may be that the gulphs will bear us down,
             It may be we shall reach the happy isles....”

  “How these worries must increase the difficulties of study in the case
  of each one of you;” wrote a faithful friend, the Dowager Countess of
  Buchan, next day. “But then the certainty of success _somehow_, as the
  dear Newman used to say, when he meant that there were benedictions in
  the air; and that you will surely have worked out the greatest
  possible benefit for womankind for all generations, even if
  hostilities are prolonged, must be a support now and an abundant
  recompense, I hope, for all your toils when they are happily
  concluded.”

About the same time another “honourable woman” was writing:

  “SIR,

        I venture to trouble you with a post office Order for £2,—
  payable from me to yourself,—as my small contribution to the Fund
  needed by the General Committee for securing a Complete Medical
  Education for Women in Edinburgh.

  The question is so important, and the Lady-students have manifested so
  fine a spirit and temper under the harassing trials, that a large
  proportion of their countrymen will, I trust, feel the obligation of
  sustaining them during their conflict with jealousies and prejudices
  which will scarcely be credited by a future generation.

  Permit me to offer you my thanks for the service you render to a good
  cause by managing the financial concerns of the movement, and believe
  me, Sir, with much respect.

                                            Yours,
                                                  HARRIET MARTINEAU.

  W. L. Reid, Esq.”

At the Senatus meeting on Oct. 21st., the question of admitting women to
the First Professional Examination was discussed, and the Medical
Faculty was instructed to examine them. It is interesting to know that
all the candidates passed.

But S. J.-B. was not one of them. All her strength was being spent in
carving out the way.

It was matter for congratulation, of course, that the schemes of the
enemy had been foiled; but the friends of the women in the University
were now more anxious than ever to raise the whole question on to a
level above these harassing obstacles. At a meeting of the University
Council Dr. Alexander Wood moved that “the University is bound in honour
and justice to render it possible for these women who have already
commenced their studies, to complete them.”

“This,” said the _Lancet_, “is precisely the ground we have always taken
up about the matter; and we hope the General Council of the University
will, by the adoption of Dr. Alexander Wood’s motion, put an end to the
controversy which has redounded so little to the credit of that school.”

Dr. Wood made a brave and telling little speech, and was ably seconded
by Mr. Alexander Nicolson. In moving the amendment, Professor Turner,
with great shrewdness, quoted S. J.-B.’s letter to the Dean of the
Medical Faculty of two years before (see p. 235), a letter which, at a
superficial glance, looked like the weakest point in her case—the letter
in which she had signified her willingness “to withdraw my application
altogether if, after due and sufficient trial, it should be found
impracticable to grant me a continuance of the favour which I now
request”; and of course no one present knew enough of the facts to
reply. It was only after Dr. Wood’s motion had been lost by 107 votes to
97, that S. J.-B. had an opportunity of pointing out—in the hospitable
columns of the _Scotsman_—that the letter quoted had reference only to
the tentative proposal that she, alone and without matriculation, should
attend Professor Balfour’s and Professor Allman’s summer courses. This
proposal the University had refused, “deferring the whole question till
a permanent plan could be arranged and formally sanctioned by all the
necessary authorities,—which was finally accomplished after eight months
of consideration and delay.”

This is one instance—out of hundreds—of S. J.-B.’s extraordinary ability
to refute statements that _looked true_, that _might have been true_,
that _were nearly true_,—by a precise quotation of facts. It was an
ability that made for her more enemies than friends as life went on. Let
it be noted, too, that, but for the generosity of the press, she never
could have corrected such statements at all.

  “To sum up the whole matter in one word,” she wrote, “I will venture
  to say, that, instead of the daily trials of the past two years and
  the apparent deadlock at which we have now arrived, we should have
  found nothing but smooth paths for our feet, and no difficulties from
  either students or professors, had Dr. Christison but kept to the
  promise he voluntarily made to me at the close of my single interview—
  of two minutes—with him 2 years ago—‘I shall vote against you, but I
  shall take no measures to oppose you.’”

Once more the _Lancet_ made dignified protest:

  “The Edinburgh school has come badly out of its imbroglio with the
  lady students. The motion of Dr. Alexander Wood, to which we made
  reference last week, was negatived by a majority of ten. As we then
  pointed out, the issue before the General Council was neither more nor
  less than this,—to keep faith with the female students whom the
  University had allowed to proceed two years in their medical
  curriculum. The Council was not asked to commit itself in the
  slightest degree to any opinion, favourable or unfavourable, to the
  admission of ladies to a medical career. It had only to concede, in
  common courtesy, not to say common fairness, the right to which the
  best legal advice had clearly shown the female students to be
  entitled,—the right to carry on the studies they had been allowed to
  prosecute half way towards graduation. Will it be believed? An
  amendment postponing the settlement of the difficulty till it had been
  duly considered by the authorities of the University, was put and
  carried; as if there was any more room for ‘consideration’ in the
  matter! Thus Edinburgh stands convicted of having acted unfairly
  towards seven ladies, whom she first accepted as pupils, and then
  stopped half-way in their career.”[91]

Footnote 91:

  _Lancet_, November 4, 1871.

Move and countermove follow with bewildering rapidity at this time.
Within a fortnight Professor Muirhead is urging the Senatus to rescind
the regulations for the admission of women to the University, reserving
the rights of those already entered; and this is passed by a majority of
one,—14 to 13.

Eighteen Professors, however, rose up in wrath to protest against this
decision, and—as only fifteen, out of a total of thirty-five, could be
got to support it,—the regulations of Nov. 1869, were confirmed by the
University Court, and everything was left _in statu quo_![92]

Footnote 92:

  “The Court find it inexpedient at present to rescind the said
  resolutions and regulations, and therefore decline to give effect to
  the decision of the Senatus. The Court must not be understood as
  indicating by this deliverance any opinion as to the claims of women
  to proceed to graduation, or as to the power of the University to
  confer on women degrees in the Faculty of Medicine.” Commd. by
  direction of the University Court. J. Christison, W.S., Sec.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile—in addition to classes for the seniors—arrangements had to be
made for the three new students who had entered. It was probably in
connection with these that S. J.-B. received the following letter:

                                            “17 Drummond Place,
                                                 December 23rd. /71.

  DEAR MADAM,

        As you will probably be aware before you receive this, I have
  been utterly unsuccessful in my attempts to bring my Colleague to my
  own way of looking at the matter in question.

  I may mention to you that my own impression, derived from various
  conversations with several of the most prominent of your opponents, is
  that they would have but little objection to give you, or at least to
  make arrangements for giving you, the instruction you seek—_provided_
  it were sought as a favor and not claimed as a right—in other words I
  think many of them are anxious to avoid making what might be called a
  precedent. This I give you confidentially and merely as an impression,
  but I have little doubt of its being at least nearly a correct one.

                                Believe me, dear Madam,
                                                  Yours truly,
                                                        P. G. TAIT.”

This was the letter of a wise man, and it might, perhaps, have been
better for the cause in the immediate future if S. J.-B. had acted on
the advice it contained. Her reply is not forthcoming, but we know quite
well that she was not prepared to run the risk involved in acting on the
advice. Two women had already secured registration “by a postern gate,”
and that was not her aim. She longed—no one more—to write M.D. after her
name; but she would, as a matter of course, have foregone that right
forever, if, by so doing, she could have opened the gate for all.




                              CHAPTER XII
                          THE ROYAL INFIRMARY


A year previously to the date we have reached, Robert Louis Stevenson
had written in a letter to his cousin:

  “You will probably know how nicely woman’s rights were received by
  some of my fellow students the other day. The female medicals were
  hooted, hissed and jostled till the police interfered. My views are
  very neutral. I quite believe that Miss Jex-Blake and the rest of our
  fellow studentesses are the first of a noble army, pioneers,
  Columbuses and all that sort of thing. But at the same time, Miss Jex-
  Blake is playing for the esteem of posterity. Soit, I give her
  posterity, but I won’t marry either her, or her fellows. Let posterity
  marry them. If posterity gets hold of this letter I shall probably be
  burnt in effigy by some Royal Female College of Surgeons of the
  future.”

It was many years before this letter was brought to S. J.-B.’s notice,
and when it was, she received it with a hearty laugh of genuine
appreciation. She enjoyed R. L. S. much more than he enjoyed her, but
she had never had the smallest wish to marry him!

He was entirely wrong, moreover, in the assumption that the women
students would have to wait for posterity to marry them. This very
autumn of 1871—to the profound sorrow and discomfiture of many upholders
of the movement—saw the engagement of no less than three of them. Mrs.
Evans’ engagement has been already noted in a letter from Dr. Patrick
Heron Watson. In a characteristic passage, we learn how the news of it
came to S. J.-B.’s ears:

  “After my business over with R., I rose to go.

  ‘Oh, sit down a minute. So your class is thinning?’ [Miss Anderson had
  been married a month before].

  ‘Yes,’ quoth I dolorously. ‘We’ve lost one.’

  ‘And I hear you’re going to lose another!’

  ‘Oh, no,’ protestingly. ‘I hope not.’

  ‘But I think so.’

  ‘Do you? Well, have you heard who?’

  ‘Mrs. Evans.’

  ‘Oh, no,—I don’t believe it.’

  ‘Well, she told me so herself.’

  ‘_Did_ she?—and who on earth to?’

  R. got red up to top of bald crown. ‘Have you no idea?’

  ‘No,’ (a fib by this time).

  ‘Really no idea?’

  ‘How should I?’

  ‘Well,—she asked _me_ to tell you about it,—does that give you an
  idea?’

  ‘_Mr. R.!_—you don’t mean to say it’s you?’

  Great redness, and ‘Yes, I do.’

  ‘Well!!!—I hope your treachery will go between you and your sleep!’

  ‘Now don’t you be hard upon her! Will you go and see her?’

  ‘No, certainly not. The most she can expect is that I don’t send a
  policeman after her.’

  ‘And brand her with D?’

  ‘Yes. You may tell her I won’t do that,—and that’s the utmost she can
  expect!’

  And leaving,—‘Well, I think you’re an uncommonly lucky man, but I hope
  your conscience will prevent your sleeping!’”

This was all very well, but the blow was a severe one, especially as
Miss Chaplin was married—to Professor Ayrton—a month or two later.

  “I do hope you and Miss Pechey will remain firm to the end,” writes
  Miss M‘Laren plaintively, “for really three marriages within six
  months is quite alarming.”

How many times Miss Pechey was urged to forsake the good fight one
cannot even roughly conjecture. Certainly very often.[93]

Footnote 93:

  The following scrap has been inadvertently preserved. There is not
  even any certain indication to whom it is addressed:

  “When I came into the Anatomical room and saw you sitting there
  dissecting, I was overpowered,—utterly conquered. When I spoke to you
  and you looked up at me to answer, the look you gave me was the coup
  de mort!—I determined then in my own mind to seek you for my wife....

  But to see you as you were then with your superlative beauty, working
  so bravely, so sensibly,—all fashion, frivolity and folly cast aside,—
  was to me so new, so strange and so admirable a sight, that on
  considering and re-considering it, I don’t wonder at myself for
  flinging aside ordinary prudence to make a snatch at a jewel of such
  unusual brilliancy.”

  It is almost disappointing to reflect that the recipient of this
  tribute was not equally prepared to “fling aside ordinary prudence.”

There was no time, however, to weep over fallen comrades. One must just
give them decent burial, so to speak, and pass on. From this time forth
the work in hand must take a two-fold direction:

1. The struggle in Edinburgh must be carried on with unabated energy, as
if success were a matter of course.

2. Every enquiry must be made, with the utmost secrecy and discretion,
as to a more hopeful solution of the problem elsewhere.

The following letters indicate some of the influences at work:

                                          “13 Sussex Square,
                                                  Brighton.
                                                        1. November.

  DARLING,

        You must not think I don’t sympathize with you, but I am so
  vexed and perplexed really I don’t know what to say. I always hope you
  can see the next step in a clearer and brighter light than I do, and,—
  you are sure you have my best wishes. I am rather uneasy about you,
  being sure you must be worn and harassed, and can hardly know what to
  do next.

  I am very glad the examinations were successfully passed....

                                          Your loving,
                                                        M. E. J.-B.”

                                              “Trinity College,
                                                 Cambridge,
                                                      Oct. 18. 1871.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Mr. Sidgwick has shown me in “the Scotsman” a notice to the
  effect that they are attempting to exclude you from paying the fees at
  Edinburgh.

  Are they making a final effort to reject you? Will it be successful?
  If so, have you any plan of action.

  Please let us know, for Mr. Sidgwick and I have been consulting
  together, and have made up our minds that we will try all that we can
  now for your admission to this university, and we are ready to begin,
  if you feel that this is your best place to turn to, and if you need
  it. Let us know then.

  We feel quite sure of ultimate success here in the matter of full
  admission of women to the whole benefits of the university.

  Still we do not know how distant ‘Ultimate’ may be. We are not
  _sanguine_ of success at present in your cause. Still we think it
  worth while trying, if it would materially help you.

                            I am,
                                         Yours truly,
                                                      JAMES STUART.”

So there were very brave people in Cambridge as well as in Edinburgh:
for Mr. Stuart as well as Mr. Sidgwick knew all about that unfortunate
speech and the lawsuit to which it led. S. J.-B. had scrupulously sent
them the records; and, as a matter of fact, Mr. Sidgwick had been one of
the many distinguished people who subscribed to the Fund for defraying
the expenses of the lawsuit.

If only the struggle had ended here: if only the University had
consented to give the women the little ledge they coveted on its
precipitous wall: or, failing that, if some young, enlightened
university had said, “Come to us!”—the story would be in all ways a
pleasanter one to tell. But that is not how things happen in life.
Removal to another university at this stage would simply have meant
beginning the fight all over again; and Edinburgh—blundering old
Edinburgh—was so kind, so homelike, with its great army of friends, many
of them convinced that victory lay within sight, that the inducement to
stay in spite of all was great. The very next turn of the wheel might
revolutionize all things.

Meanwhile the protagonist had been on the strain for nearly three years,
and she was growing very weary of the struggle: she was losing a little
of the verve that had carried her on hitherto. The incessant canvassing,
organizing and writing had developed her inherent business capacity to
the last point, and was making her a little intolerant of unbusinesslike
ways in other people. It was more difficult than formerly in journalism
and in verbal argument to show herself all things to all men as she had
done so finely in those first calls on the Professors. But she had not
the smallest idea of giving in: like a strong man lost in the snow, she
was conscious mainly of a resolute determination to keep going on
somehow.

“Your cause is sure to win,” Dr. Guthrie said to her about this time;
“but a cause may be won at the cost of a life.”

“I know,” she replied, “I am prepared to give it mine.”

But she did not mean to die if she could help it until the work was
done.

In any case the next move was fairly clear. The Annual Meeting of
Contributors to the Royal Infirmary was coming round once more, and
again the election turned on the question of the admission of the women
to the wards. S. J.-B. went doggedly on with her canvassing, but the
outer public was getting a little bored with the whole subject, and she
herself had no longer the attraction of freshness and novelty. In those
days perseverance was not reckoned a special virtue in a woman, and
persistence was a positive vice. She received one nasty snub (conveyed
through the office-boy) from one who had been almost a friend, and, in
order to understand what this meant to her, we must remember that family
tradition was strong in her still. Pelted with peas or pursued by a mud-
throwing mob, she never for a moment forgot that she was, in her own
way, _grande dame_. And now she was too tired to brush the little insult
off. “I was fool enough to go out with eyes so full of tears that I
doubted being fit for my next call.”

But the moral thews and sinews were in fine fighting form, and the
ideals of youth were as fresh as ever. The very words of the old
inspiring quotations rose to her mind. How surprised the old managers
would have been if they had heard them! They thought it was only that
weary question of Miss Jex-Blake and the Infirmary.

Kindly folk were many, however, and every now and then she met an
unexpected tribute of appreciation or respect; and sufficient votes were
gained to make the dreary proceeding worth while.[94]

Footnote 94:

  It was at this Christmas season that Miss Miranda Hill sent to her old
  friend, in the form of a brooch, a “winged Victory,”—meaning, she
  said, “many things,”—“the victory of a stedfast noble purpose over
  outward obstacles, of love over time.”

Sometimes she would return from these missions to find herself called
out to a slum maternity case undertaken through the mediation of a
friendly doctor. Then,—

  “Home after 10 p.m. Then to write leader for Monday. Done about 12.15.
  Then to relight fire and get warm,—then bed!”

  “Sunday, [Dec.] 31st. Wrote paragraphs and finished article. Went down
  to Scotsman Office....

  Oh, dear, I hope the things will be in right tomorrow,—and oh, _how_ I
  hope we may win!

  We have 296 votes more or less promised. _We ought._

  Now,—‘ring out the old, ring in the new’—Ah, that it may be so in some
  things,—‘Ring out the care that frets the mind’[95]—Ring in quiet and
  peace and liberty,—‘leave to toil’.”

Footnote 95:

  “Ring out the grief that saps the mind,” is Tennyson’s line. S. J.-
  B.’s version needs no explanation.

Next day the great meeting took place, and this time a large hall had
been taken for the purpose.

As before, six candidates were proposed by those in power, and six by
those in favour of the women. The task of the latter was made easier by
the fact that the suggestion of mixed classes had been given up some two
or three months before, the Committee for Securing a Complete Medical
Education for Women in Edinburgh having undertaken to guarantee the
payment of teachers, and to provide suitable rooms and accommodation for
the classes, if the University should find this latter an insoluble
problem.

Professor Christison pointed out incidentally that 80 beds at £40 a bed
would be one item in the reckoning.

When the votes were counted there were:

                       For the Women,         177
                       For the Powers,        168

“The result was received with great cheering and waving of handkerchiefs
from the ladies’ party.”

Professor Masson then proceeded to move:

  “That henceforward all registered students of Medicine shall be
  admitted to the educational advantages of the Infirmary without
  distinction of sex,—all details of arrangements, however, being left
  to the discretion of the managers.”

The hostile party raised an objection to this on the ground of want of
adequate notice—though Professor Masson had, as a matter of fact,
advertised it in the public papers as required—and, through an
indescribable hubbub, the proposer stood his ground, ably supported by
Professor Calderwood and by Mr. M‘Laren, M.P. When it became clear that
they were going to carry their point, the opposing party rose and left
the hall almost _en masse_; and it was then that Dr. Guthrie made what
proved to be his last public speech, in support of Professor Masson’s
motion. At the close of his peroration, with a wave of his hand towards
the door through which the great retreat had taken place, he concluded
with the lines S. J.-B. had quoted in her diary the night before,

                “Ring out the old, ring in the new, ...
                Ring out the false, ring in the true!”

The motion was then put to the meeting and carried unanimously.

“I, oh _so_ tired!” says S. J.-B.,—“hearing voices round me in a sort of
swoon.”

Her letter-bag for the next few days was enough to put new life into
anyone.

                                                 “24 Hill Street,
                                                          Edinburgh.

  “My dear Miss Blake, and all your brave sisterhood, Three cheers for
  you and one cheer more! My husband has just come back and told me of
  your victory.

  May this be an augury of future success in every direction.

                                Ever very truly yours,
                                                  E. H. S. BLACKIE.”

A lawyer who had strenuously opposed the idea of mixed classes writes,

  “For your sake, I shall make my first charity this year £5 _to the
  Infirmary_.”

And no one was more enthusiastic than the young man who was demonstrator
of Anatomy at the time of the riot:

  “It would be almost a mockery to wish you all a Happy New Year after
  such success. It is enough to turn one’s head, but only, I suppose,
  the heads which hammered on so hard in defeat, or rather repulse, are
  not to be turned with victory.”

It would have been almost a mockery, certainly, though not in the sense
he meant.

  “Sunday, Jan. 7th. Hear that the doctors are going about getting their
  patients to sign papers,—exact tenor unknown.”

True enough, here were already the first mutterings of a fresh storm,
and indeed, most people must have been rather uneasy at so terrifying a
victory.

  “Dear Miss Jex-Blake,” writes Dr. Heron Watson on January 5th, “See to
  it that there is a full representation on behalf of the ladies on
  Monday week at the adjourned meeting, as I expect foul play!...”

And another lawyer writes:

  “DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I don’t know whether you are taking any means to secure a muster
  of your friends at the Infirmary meeting on Monday week; but I think
  it would be worth while to do so. I am afraid our opponents may
  attempt a surprise for the purpose of rescinding the Statute passed at
  last meeting as to the admission of Lady Students. I have not heard
  that they have any such plan on foot; but as no notice requires to be
  given of any such motion, they may not improbably try it, trusting to
  our being off our guard.

                                Yours truly,
                                                    WILLIAM ROBSON.”

A fortnight after the Annual Meeting, the Contributors met to hear the
result of a scrutiny of the votes, and it was then that the following
unexpected issue—quite distinct, of course, from the immediate object of
the scrutiny—was thrust upon them:

On the side of the women had voted,

                              28 firms,
                              31 ladies,
                               7 doctors.

On the side of the powers,

                              14 firms,
                               2 ladies,
                              37 doctors.

It was now claimed that the votes of firms were incompetent, at the
majority really lay on the other side.

  “It mattered nothing,” said the _Scotsman_,[96] “that firms had voted
  ever since the Infirmary was founded; that contributors qualified only
  as members of firms had, as has now been ascertained, sat over and
  over again on the Board of Management, and on the Committee of
  Contributors. It was of equally slight importance that the firms whom
  it was now sought to disqualify had been among the most generous
  benefactors of the charity, and that, with the imminent prospect
  before them of great pecuniary necessity, it would probably be
  impossible, without their aid, to carry out even the plans for the new
  building. The firms had voted in favour of the ladies, and the firms
  must go, if at least the law would (as it probably will not) bear out
  the medical men in their reckless endeavour to expel them.”

Footnote 96:

  January 29, 1872.

An appeal to law, however, is a slow affair, and on this occasion there
was obviously no inducement for the law to bestir itself unduly. It was
not till July 23rd that Lord Jerviswoode pronounced the votes of firms
to be perfectly valid.

The case was appealed to a higher court, where it did not come on for
trial till the end of October: it was then again postponed and judgment
was not given till December.

  “Dec. 7th. Saturday. Judgment from Second Division in our favour on
  all points.”

The Annual Meeting was now once more at hand, however, when new managers
might be elected who were unfriendly to the women. Needless to say the
woman’s party lost no time. A Contributors’ meeting was called for
December 16th, and another for December 23rd, when a vote was passed
admitting the women to the Infirmary on condition that their visits were
to be separate from those of the men, and that they were to go only to
those wards where their presence was invited by the physicians.

So at last they got their tickets, and began an attendance which was to
“qualify” for graduation.

“Qualify” in the technical sense; assuredly not in any other. What the
girl graduate of the present day would say to such qualification, one
need scarcely ask. Here is S. J.-B.’s account of it:

  “Dr. Balfour gave us a separate hour in his wards three times a week,
  and such chances of practical study as could be arranged from time to
  time. Dr. Watson’s very large practice, as the most eminent surgeon in
  Scotland, made it impossible for him, at whatever inconvenience, to
  repeat his visit in this manner, and our enemies would have gained
  their point, had he not, with a kindness which I find myself even now
  quite unable to acknowledge duly, given up for the two whole winter
  sessions his Sunday mornings (his one day of rest) to our instruction,
  while steadily refusing to accept any fees whatever for this great
  sacrifice of his time and strength. Few more chivalrous acts were ever
  done, and I only hope he found his reward in the lifelong gratitude of
  a dozen women, who were not at that time too much accustomed to such
  kindness and courtesy as his.”

To the end of her life, S. J.-B. looked upon these two men as “the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land,” and another name she would have
added with (in one sense) even better reason—that of Dr. Peel Ritchie,
who, a strong Conservative, absolutely and avowedly at that time without
sympathy for the “cause,” from a sheer sense of fair play, gave up his
class of men at the Royal Dispensary in order to teach a class of women
instead.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Of course S. J.-B. was a “celebrity” by this time. Here is an amusing
letter from a distinguished man who had been asked to meet her and her
friends at dinner:

                                                   [Letter undated.]

  “MY DEAR EDITOR,

        Wae’s me that I am engaged on Saturday! If I could on any decent
  pretence get off I would do it _aftsoons_, for apart from the pleasure
  of meeting yourself and Mrs. R., I would like fine to meet the other
  ladies in such company, especially _some_ of them. I won’t say which!

  But I accepted an invitation the other day from —— to meet a Mr. —— a
  very nice Irishman that’s working at our Celtic MSS., and I promised
  to show the Milesian the way. So though I would go far for the sake of
  the ladies and of you, I feel that it would be rather too flagrant a
  breach of faith to tell old —— that I have another engagement which I
  had _forgotten_. I wish he or his wife would take some harmless
  disease for a day or two and put off their dinner.

  I needn’t say that I appreciate immensely the distinction of being
  asked as the one man in Edinburgh worthy of admission to that select
  company! It’s equal to the Cross of the Legion of Honour and a great
  deal better. There’s something in the idea too that piques the
  imagination. It’s as if—but far better—a favoured mortal got a special
  card per Ganymede, to sup quietly in Olympus with Mr. and Mrs. Jupiter
  and the Misses Minerva, Diana and Urania: or like being asked by a
  Flamen and his wife to meet three of the Vestal Virgins over a jar of
  Falernian; or again like an invitation from the grand Lama to have a
  little jollification with a few Buddhist lady abbesses in the
  innermost shrine of the great temple at Lassa, or from a chief of
  Carbonari to take a glass and pipe with Mazzini, Garibaldi, etc.
  There’s no end of the things it suggests.

  As to your unworthy fears, fie upon them! You are more to be envied
  than the Sultan, the Pope or Brigham Young.

  Hoping to have a chance some other time of doing homage to the
  Trinity, and to have the pleasure soon of calling upon Mrs. Russel.

                                           I rest,
                                                   Ever Yours,
                                                                ——.”

And her fame—or notoriety—extended to the most unexpected classes of
society. “Miss Jex-Blake had that house last year,” the driver of a
Highland coach would say, pointing with his whip in the direction of the
farm where she had stayed. Her name occurred repeatedly in that year’s
pantomime, and Harlequin and Columbine had called to ask if she had any
objection to this,—an incident which she always recalled with amusement
and appreciation. The main reference, as it happened, was quite
complimentary. A game was played on the stage in which various Edinburgh
dignitaries were the cards; but “Miss Jex-Blake” took the trick.

Her dislike of publicity was great, but she had long since hardened
herself to endure it in so far as was necessary for her work’s sake.
Beyond that she drew the line absolutely. The press rang with her name
for a few years, but she steadily refused to be interviewed. It was
nothing to her that the public had not the smallest idea of the more
human side of her character. “Nothing,” she wrote in response to many
requests, “would induce her to consent to the sale of her photograph.”
Her holidays were spent in absolute retirement, and intimate friends
will never forget how, on the first day in the country, the words would
rise to her lips,—

    “The pulse of dew upon the grass kept his within its number,
    And silent shadows from the trees refreshed him like a slumber.”

A memorandum of this period directs that, in case of her death, the
funeral shall be as simple and inexpensive as possible, and that the
headstone—if headstone there be—shall bear only her name, the dates, and
the words,—“Then are they glad because they be quiet.”

  “Partly you see, I am so tired,” she had written half to herself and
  half to Miss Du Pre in February,—“not physically or even mentally
  exactly. I could come up to any given exertion of either kind for the
  time being; but my whole nature is strained and wearied. I can get up
  energy for nothing,—can but just get through the day’s work in the day
  and long for rest!

                      ‘Hades must rest us for ages,
                      Ere we can glory see.’

  No, my glory _is_ rest!...

  How strange lives are! Miss Anderson’s husband—married Oct. 5th (?),
  died on Monday, November 12th,—love enough to change a life for, and
  it,—no, not _it_, the marriage,—ends in 4 months!”

It was about this time that her friend Mrs. Unwin died. Up to the last
she had followed the Edinburgh campaign with intense interest and
sympathy. S. J.-B. had promised that, whatever the claims of her work
might be, she would pay a last visit to the Yorkshire home in case of
“utter need”; but Mrs. Unwin refused to make this plea. Resolutely she
bore her own cross: and, with a last message of “deepest love and
regard,” she passed away.




                              CHAPTER XIII
                     THE ACTION AGAINST THE SENATUS


  “MADAM,

        ... I never read or heard of such a hard case as yours—and so
  peculiar. It might be worth while to seek the advice of a Solicitor—
  who would consult counsel—to find out whether you and your
  disappointed friends have no case at Law. I would (if it be possible)
  just like to know what the Court of Session would have to say,
  touching—not only the arbitrariness, but the gross injustice, if not
  absolute illegality, of the whole affair. You matriculate—get through
  with about half of your classes—great loss of time—money—
  disappointment—even exasperation or half ruin—all incurred: and are
  then summarily brought to—made to fairly stick—and yet no legal
  remedy! I can’t believe it. I would try and find out,—but yet, it is
  an awful prospect. The length of time, and expense that would have to
  be borne, ere any decision could be come to. You seem to me like one
  who took a leap, without _seeing from the_ first,[97] where the leap
  was to land you. For surely, had you foreseen all this,—you never
  would have set foot in Edinburgh....

Footnote 97:

                   “Believe and venture! as for pledges,
                   The gods give none.”

  The tide is coming in and nothing can retard it,—nothing worth
  speaking of. And these views will be realised and acted upon some day.
  Depend upon it.

  The day will come when women will sit cheek by jowl with men through a
  six months’ course of Anatomy, Physiology, Midwifery, etc., etc.,
  right cheerfully, and neither jeering nor sneering there—nor winks nor
  any other impertinences—singularly misplaced and out of time—if
  certain important personages could only see matters rightly. Yes, and
  walk the Hospitals—surgical and medical—and the lying-in Hospital
  also, the Eye Infirmary, the Cancer one and the Consumptive one, and
  the Lock into the bargain. And then all these important obstructives
  will be dead, buried, rotten—forgotten—and their writings selling at
  three halfpence per lb.”

The above is quoted from the letter of a complete stranger,—the so-
called “man in the street” apparently, and is a sample of many that came
pouring in upon S. J.-B. during those troublous years. “Has the
University any _right_ to act like this?” friends kept asking
constantly; and we know that more than one of the Professors had advised
an appeal to a Court of Law.

Towards the close of 1871, S. J.-B. seems to have consulted her brother
on the subject, drawing from him the following letters:

                                            “The College,
                                                  Cheltenham.
                                                      Nov. 18. 1871.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        I do not think you can gain anything by sueing the Professors or
  by going to Law with the University in any other shape.

  It may be too late now to persuade, but it would be at all times
  hopeless to compel, a great University to open its doors to ladies.

  I return the Queries and Opinions: and should distrust legal opinions
  that advised further law-suits.

  It is most provoking, and your treatment has been unjust: but it comes
  to my mind to this, When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to
  another.

  You can make better use of your time by getting University instruction
  elsewhere, than by throwing legal pebbles at the University gates of
  Auld Reekie: and life being short you had better gather up the net
  result of your Scotch experience, and go to Zürich or Paris, or
  wherever your own knowledge and judgment lead you.

  I am exceedingly sorry for you; but I see nothing else to be done, so
  far as I understand the facts.

  It is very tantalizing that the majorities have always been so narrow:
  and that there has been so much to justify sanguine friends in their
  advice.

  I shall be glad to hear your decision, and both Hetty and I are very
  sorry for you.

                                 Your affect. brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

                                            “The College,
                                                  Cheltenham,
                                                      Nov. 21. 1871.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        There is more to be said for legal action than I knew of: for I
  thought Paris or Zürich degree was legal qualification in England:
  though of course to go abroad for degree is objectionable in several
  ways, and the language must slightly increase the difficulties.

  Still there is nothing to be said for legal action unless it is likely
  to succeed: and of that your Scotch lawyers are the best judges:
  though their expectations hitherto have been more sanguine than
  accurate in your case.

  I am sorry I cannot be of much use, and very sorry the Trades Union is
  so strong and so well organized.

  It must be very annoying, and is certainly a horrible waste of time:
  but half of most people’s time is spent in untying the foolish knots
  of blind opponents.

  Hetty joins in love.

                                Your affect. brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

                                           “13 Sussex Square,
                                                  Brighton.
                                                      Jan. 21. 1872.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        One line to wish you many happy returns of the day, and to tell
  you that all is going on very well here....

  We were very glad that you crept into such a haven of rest as Mrs.
  Nichol has to offer you: and I am quite sure the strain of so much
  fighting and organizing must be very great.

  It seems hardly possible that you should get on with your own Medical
  education while there is so much polemical business on hand; but if
  you carry the point for all women, it will be cheaply bought at the
  sacrifice of two or three years of individual training in books and
  bones.”

“When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another.”

This was advice which S. J.-B. had always kept well in mind, though not
with regard to Paris and Zürich; and enquiries as to other British
Universities had been diligently prosecuted. St. Andrews was the one
that most naturally suggested itself, “as a comparatively rural
University, without male students of medicine, and yet with the power to
grant degrees.” It is true that the Medical Curriculum at St. Andrews
was—and is—very incomplete; but the deficiency might be made good by
some teaching-school unable—or unwilling—to grant degrees. Professor
Lewis Campbell and Mrs. Campbell had taken a deep interest in the
project of making their University the Alma Mater of the women students;
S. J.-B. had visited them at St. Andrews in the autumn of 1871, with
Miss Massingberd Mundy[98]; and there are a number of cordial letters
witnessing to the genuine desire of both the Professor and his wife for
the success of the scheme.

Footnote 98:

  Miss Massingberd Mundy was one of the junior students who did not go
  on to graduation, but her gaiety and humour made her a real
  acquisition to the little circle in the trying days.

Their enthusiasm was not typical of the University, however, though
Principal Tulloch “seemed friendly in a vague way”; and all hope in this
direction had, for the moment, to be given up.

Meanwhile S. J.-B., on behalf of herself and her fellow-students, had
made a final appeal to the University Court of Edinburgh to provide them
with the means of completing their education, and she had also forwarded
to them a farther legal opinion from the Lord Advocate and Sheriff
Fraser to the effect that the University authorities had full power to
permit the matriculation of women in 1869; that the resolutions then
passed amounted to a permission to women to “_study Medicine_” in the
University, and that therefore the women concerned were entitled to
demand the means of doing so; and finally, that if such means were
persistently refused, the legal mode of redress lay in an Action of
Declarator.

On January 8th the University Court resolved that it was not in their
power to comply with the requirements of the women as regarded teaching:
the whole question, they said, had been “complicated by the introduction
of the subject of graduation, which is not essential to the completion
of a medical or other education”: if the ladies would altogether give up
the question of graduation, and be content with certificates of
proficiency, the Court would try to meet their views.

  “They forgot,” says S. J.-B., “that though a degree is ‘not essential’
  to a medical education, it _is_ absolutely indispensable to any
  practical use of it,—that is to any lawful practice of the medical
  profession.”

She offered, however, to waive the question of graduation,—pending an
authoritative decision as to the powers and duties of the University,—if
arrangements might meanwhile be made for the women to continue their
education. To this the Court agreed. Farther correspondence, however,
elicited the fact that the Court had no intention of coming to any
decision with regard to its own powers, and that it did not mean to take
any active steps in the matter.

  “On the other hand,” says S. J.-B., “we had no less authority than
  that of the Lord Advocate of Scotland for believing that we were
  absolutely entitled to what we had so humbly solicited, and that a
  Court of Law would quietly award to us what seemed unattainable by any
  other means; we had the very widely spread and daily increasing
  sympathy of the community at large, and received constant offers of
  help from friends of every kind.... Under these circumstances we did
  the one thing that remained for us to do, we brought an Action of
  Declarator against the Senatus of the University,—praying to have it
  declared that the Senatus was bound, in some way or other, to enable
  us to complete our education and to proceed to the medical degree
  which would entitle us to take place on the Medical Register among the
  legally-qualified practitioners of medicine.”

Of course the news of this daring step was forthwith noised abroad, and
S. J.-B. received a protesting letter from Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell,
urging her not to waste on an uncertain lawsuit, money that might be so
much more profitably spent in some other way.

The following is S. J.-B.’s reply:

  “DEAR DR. BLACKWELL,

        I suppose rumour very seldom does report things correctly, so I
  do not wonder that you have been misinformed about the action which we
  are on the point of bringing against the Senatus. It is not one for
  breach of promise (what fun _Punch_ would make of it if it were!) but
  simply an Action of Declarator whereby we pray one of the Judges of
  Session to declare that the Senatus is bound to complete our
  education, according to the decided opinion given by the Lord Advocate
  of Scotland.

  In the brief space of a letter it would be impossible for me to submit
  to you all the facts and grounds on which our intention is based, tho’
  I should be glad to explain them in detail if you were on the spot,
  but you will be glad to hear that not only are the whole of the
  students here of the same mind as myself on this point, but our
  determination is strengthened by the advice and concurrence of some of
  the wisest heads in Edinburgh, including those of friendly Professors.
  I hope therefore that you will believe that, though you find a
  difficulty at a distance from the field of action in concurring in our
  present step, you would probably do so if all the facts of the case
  were as thoroughly before you as they are before us and our
  counsellors.

  It is just because I find that London friends are so little au courant
  of the facts that I am hoping to give an explanatory lecture when in
  town next month, and I need not say how doubly glad I shall be to give
  every explanation and information to you to whom [all] of us medical
  women owe so much gratitude and respect as our pioneer and forerunner.

                               Believe me,
                                          Yours truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

Now that there was something definite to be done, S. J.-B. was in her
element once more and the following letters make it very clear that her
“counsellors” were working _con amore_.

                                               “University Club,
                                                   Edinburgh.
                                                       18 March, 72.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Under the dread of bringing disgrace on the whole masculine
  race, I applied myself today during all the time I could command to
  the framing of the great Summons, and I brought it up to a point at
  which I think nothing of importance remains to be added except the
  historical statement and the pleas in law, both of which you may take
  for granted will be made right. If I can get them done this evening
  I’ll send them to you.

  I thought as you were in a hurry to see the thing I had better let you
  have what I had done at once, and so I took it to White Millar and
  left it with him to send you. There must be a distinction drawn
  between you and the other ladies who are ready for the first
  professional exam., and the others who are not. So you will please
  note on the margin of the M.S. who those are that occupy these
  respective positions and the exact stage at which the less advanced
  ones have arrived. I must also have the dates and exact terms of the
  several resolutions and letters referred to in the last article, so as
  to make the chronological statement complete and accurate. I would
  like before the thing is finally adjusted to consult all the available
  sources of information on the subject of graduation and the original
  constitution of the University, and also I think if Bologna was our
  model, as seems to be taken for granted, that it would be worth while
  to communicate with some one there, such as the Secretary of the
  Senatus, if they have one, or the Librarian, to get authoritative
  statistics on the subject.

  I have not heard from the Dean of Faculty yet in reply to my inquiry
  on the point of professional punctilio involved in my undertaking the
  case, but another eminent legal friend whose advice I highly value
  thinks on the whole that I ought _not_ to undertake it. This did not
  prevent me, however, from doing the Summons! Meantime you needn’t
  mention that I am doing it, in case of my not going on with the case,
  which might lead to unfavourable remarks, if it were supposed that I
  had begun and afterwards backed out of it. I’ll be very sorry to do
  so, if that is the Dean’s opinion.

                         Believe me,
                                    Yours very truly,
                                                    ALEX. NICOLSON.”

Apparently the decision of the Dean was adverse to Mr. Nicolson, for the
case was taken up, and very ably argued, by Sheriff Fraser and Mr.
M‘Laren (afterwards Lord M‘Laren), who had been junior counsel in the
libel case.

  “I am quite certain,” writes Mr. Fraser to S. J.-B., “that upon a more
  thorough investigation it will be found that women did attend the
  Universities and graduated.... When you are up in London just now
  perhaps you would refer to some of the books in the British Museum,
  mentioned by Watts, which are not in the Advocates’ Library. You need
  not trouble yourself with the University of Edinburgh, as I have gone
  over the whole Records of the Council and of the Professors since the
  institution of the University, and I cannot find a single case of a
  woman being a student. The same I fear will be the result of an
  examination of the records of the other universities. This was
  natural, for, until recently, both the law and the social customs of
  Scotland, like those of other barbarous countries, regarded women as
  nothing else but domestic drudges and field hands.”

It was useless, of course, to suggest the British Museum. S. J.-B. had
long since exhausted that mine. And she had no great faith in the
information to be derived from correspondence with foreign secretaries
and librarians. She had worked that vein too. It still remained to send
an emissary to examine the archives of the Italian Universities at first
hand, and this was what she now resolved to do. Someone had commended to
her interest about this time an able and well-educated young lady whose
health was causing her friends some anxiety, and, after watching and
tending her for some time S. J.-B. despatched her on the mission, duly
armed with the following _dossier_:

  “1. At each University get access, if possible, to the official
  archives and lists of students, and make a complete list of every
  woman who studied there, with date, Faculty, and other particulars.

  2. If you cannot get access yourself, get the lists made by some
  official, and, if possible, compare it with originals or other
  authorities.

  3. If possible get the Secretary or Librarian, or some Professor to
  attest the list with his signature, as truly extracted from the
  records.

  4. Pay any necessary fees, having as far as possible arranged for
  these beforehand.

  5. Make copies in one book of every list obtained, of name and address
  of each person making or attesting such lists, and of all additional
  information likely to be of value.

  6. Send off attested lists to me in registered letters as soon as
  obtained, marking in your M.S. book the exact duplicate in case of
  loss and sending a separate letter to Miss P. to announce dispatch.

  7. Do not let your own M.S. book out of your hands for any purpose.

  8. Send all lists on foolscap and not on foreign paper.”

The ambassador seems to have carried through her mission most
efficiently, and an imposing array of names was the result. At any rate
_that_ vein was now worked out.

In the meantime “the great Summons” was duly delivered, and on March
27th the Senatus met to consider what action they should take with
regard to it. We get the following informal account of what took place
from Miss Pechey:

  “I could not get particulars of the Senatus meeting ... till too late
  to write last night, but it appears that it was first moved to defend
  the action; then Fleeming Jenkin proposed that an attempt should be
  made to have an amicable lawsuit. This was negatived by 17 to 10, and
  then the other motion _not_ to defend the action being put against the
  first, was negatived by 22 to 5. Many of our friends voted to defend,—
  Wilson amongst others. He says he feels sure that the thing will never
  be fairly settled without a legal decision. I saw him today in his
  office. He is very anxious you should get some member to ask a
  question when the Parliamentary grant is being arranged.[99] He told
  me the enemy were dreadfully angry at the suit, from which he
  concluded that our Summons is well drawn up.”

  “This was the great argument for assenting to the corporate defence,”
  writes Professor Masson, “i.e. that the Senatus could not possibly let
  judgment go by default, which would yield all your demands (compulsion
  of Professors, etc.) and yet not really settle the thing, inasmuch as
  the Professors or anyone might afterwards reopen the whole judgment.
  On the same ground it is that friends don’t seem to want to stir
  individually. They say the defence is corporately by the Senatus and
  everybody will understand that, and hence that individual secession is
  superfluous. Tait, however, said he would consult his lawyer, and
  Craufurd and Jenkin meditated something of the same.”

Footnote 99:

  S. J.-B. appealed to Sir Robert Anstruther; and there is a
  businesslike note from Lady Anstruther, asking for a very brief
  summary of all the main events,—just the thing that only S. J.-B.
  could supply.

  The matter was brought forward in Aug. 1872, on Sir Robert
  Anstruther’s behalf, by Sir D. Wedderburn, see below.

On the other hand, six members of the Senatus—anxious though they well
might be to have the weary question settled one way or the other—simply
could not allow the resolution to pass without protest, and the
following minute is duly recorded in the books of the University:

  “We dissent from and protest against the resolution of the Senatus of
  March 27, 1872, to undertake the defence of the action. This we do for
  the following reasons:—(1.) Because we see no just cause for opposing
  the admission of women to the study and practice of medicine; but, on
  the contrary, consider that women who have honourably marked out such
  a course of life for themselves, ought to be forwarded and aided in
  their laudable endeavour as much as possible, by all who have the
  means, and especially by those having authority in any University or
  other institution for education; (2.) Because, in particular, we feel
  such aid and encouragement, rather than opposition and discouragement,
  to be due from us to those women who have enrolled themselves in the
  University of Edinburgh, and we entirely concur, with respect to them,
  in the desire expressed by Sir William Stirling-Maxwell, the Rector of
  the University, that they should obtain what they ask—namely, a
  complete medical education, crowned by a degree; (3.) Because we have
  seen no sufficient reason to doubt the legal and constitutional powers
  of our University to make arrangements that would be perfectly
  adequate for the purpose, and we consider the public questioning of
  such powers, in present circumstances, by the University itself, or
  any of its component bodies, unnecessary, impolitic, and capable of
  being construed as a surrender of permanent rights and privileges of
  the University, in order to evade a temporary difficulty; (4.)
  Because, without pronouncing an opinion on the question now raised, as
  to the legal rights which the pursuers have acquired by matriculation
  in the University, admission already to certain examinations, or
  otherwise, to demand from the University continued medical instruction
  and the degree on due qualification, we yet believe that they have
  thereby, and by the general tenor of the proceedings, both of the
  Senatus and of the University Court in their case hitherto, acquired a
  moral right, and created a public expectation, which the University is
  bound to meet by the full exercise of its powers in their behalf, even
  should it be with some trouble; (5.) Because, with these convictions,
  and notwithstanding our utmost respect for those of our colleagues
  from whom we may have the misfortune to differ on the subject, we
  should individually feel ashamed of appearing as defenders in such an
  action, and should account any such public appearance by us in the
  character of opponents to women desiring to enter an honoured and
  useful profession, a matter to our discredit.”

The following are the names of the six[100] Professors who felt bound
thus to stand out against the arguments of their colleagues.

Footnote 100:

  In addition to these six, Professor Fleeming Jenkin and Professor
  Cosmo Innes removed their names from the list of defenders.

    John Hughes Bennett, M.D., Professor of the Institutes of Medicine,

    David Masson, M.A., Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature,

    Henry Calderwood, LL.D., Professor of Moral Philosophy,

    James Lorimer, M.A., Professor of Public Law,

    Archibald H. Charteris, D.D., Professor of Biblical Criticism and
        Biblical Antiquities,

    William Ballantyne Hodgson, LL.D.,[101] Professor of Political
        Economy.

Footnote 101:

  Professor Hodgson was a recent addition to the professorial staff, and
  a great asset to the women’s cause.




                              CHAPTER XIV
                      THE LORD ORDINARY’S JUDGMENT


  “Did you advertise your lecture in the _Lancet_? I expect you will
  have a lot of blackguardly doctors there in consequence. Don’t have
  any libel cases, and don’t be hard on the students. They’re very bad,
  but they’re not so bad as the Professors.[102] I know you are very
  busy writing and so on, and that there would be plenty of copying for
  me to do if only I were at hand. Don’t you want me to bully and be
  bullied by?

  How I wish I could be in the gallery to make faces at you and throw
  peas!”

Footnote 102:

  As a matter of fact a number of students came—unasked—to serve as
  stewards.

An admirable and characteristic letter, this, from Miss Pechey. Was a
bracing message of warning and sympathy to a senior and chum ever more
tactfully and lightly delivered?

On April 25th, after some days in the country, S. J.-B. went to London
and was met by Miss Du Pre and Miss M‘Laren, who “heard and finally
polished up the lecture,” which was delivered the following day at St.
George’s Hall in the presence of a large and curiously assorted
audience. The Earl of Shaftesbury, who occupied the chair, was supported
by Professor Lewis Campbell, Rev. Dr. Martineau, Mrs. Garrett Anderson,
Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, the Dowager Countess of Buchan, and other well-
known folk, and among the general public were a number of girlhood’s
friends, including Miss Ada Benson, Miss Miranda Hill, and many “modern
women,”—with a sprinkling of Norfolk cousins. In the course of his

address the Chairman made a shrewd remark, of which time has proved the
truth:

  “The argument that women were not wanted in the medical profession
  struck him as very singular. He was old enough to remember when
  railways and electric telegraphs were not wanted for the simple reason
  that they were not known. When they became known and tried, we could
  not do without them, and in all probability it would be the same with
  reference to ladies in the medical profession.”

In many ways the lecture was a success, and it was largely quoted and
referred to in the press; but, for the ordinary hearer, it was
overloaded with statistics, and—with a view to that ever-possible action
for libel—the lecturer kept herself too well in hand. It is amusing to
find _The Christian World_ hinting a regret that she “had not really
worked herself up into a passion” in narrating the injustice and
vexations to which she had been exposed.

On the other hand, Mrs. Priscilla Bright M‘Laren, an unbiassed expert,
expressed the wish that the lecture should be delivered throughout the
length and breadth of the land. The publication of a pamphlet, she said,
would not have the same effect, because most people never have their
sympathies thoroughly roused unless they come face to face with the
person who has been persecuted. “If you could be seen and _heard_” she
wrote, “you would produce a wonderful effect in favour of the cause you
have at heart.”

S. J.-B. had serious thoughts of carrying out this suggestion, but—in
the interests of her own health—one is glad to record that wiser
counsels prevailed.

  “Thank you _very, very_ much, darling, for your telegram,” writes Mrs.
  Jex-Blake, the day after the lecture. “I thought if you knew how
  anxious I had been the last few hours, you would send one, but I did
  not at all expect it.”

  “I have not known where to direct to keep adding my rejoicing at the
  many accounts of the success of your lecture. Well, I am very very
  glad for you and with you, and I pray things may somehow take a fresh
  start. How very nice of some medical students to come and officiate. I
  wish Professor Masson could have been there.”

  “I am very glad to think of you as once more snug at home and I hope
  with less work in view and some anxieties abated.... I am very glad
  indeed you have given up going about lecturing.... Tom, too, thinks
  you very wise to give it up: he was struck with your looking so worn,
  and very vexed to see you so.”

It is interesting to note that S. J.-B. had taken an invalid friend home
with her to recruit! At the same time she is writing to a protégée:

  “I have seen Dr. Blackwell, and think she is rather disposed to give
  you the work.... I think you should go in your bonnet, and look sage,
  and not seem too eager for the work, and put a good price on
  yourself,—say £2 a week, or, oh, you would accept £40 for the 6
  months, etc. And be very confident you can do it all, if she asks you
  to call on her.”

This is really the most worldly letter that S. J.-B. ever wrote!

                  *       *       *       *       *

In all these later happenings, one misses the name of Mrs. Butler, who
had stood by S. J.-B. so enthusiastically in the day of small things. As
a matter of fact, Mrs. Butler was now fully embarked on her own heroic
campaign, and both Mrs. Garrett Anderson and S. J.-B. had failed to give
her their support. Thinking differently from each other on many points,
characterised indeed by a fundamentally different way of looking at
life, the two medical women alike realized the complications of modern
civilization too profoundly to add the stupendous question that occupied
Mrs. Butler to a programme that was already involved and difficult
enough. Mrs. Butler felt their attitude keenly, and it was evidently
with mingled feelings that she received a letter from Miss Pechey about
this time, asking the privilege of adding her name and that of Canon
Butler to the ever-growing Committee.

  “My dear Miss Pechey,” she writes, “You are welcome to use my own and
  my husband’s names if you think they will do your cause _any good_. We
  cannot conceive that they would, and, on that ground alone, we should
  be as glad that you should not use them. It had better be left to Miss
  Jex-Blake’s judgment.

  “All the world knows that we are on opposite sides on one of the most
  vital questions of the day, and that the Medical ladies have no
  sympathy with the efforts being made to get rid of the scandal of a
  great State system of legalised Prostitution, and therefore it appears
  to Mr. Butler and me an inconsistency that our names should appear in
  any such adverse connexion, deeply as we desire the prosperity and
  success of the medical woman movement....”

  “Dear Mrs. Butler,” writes S. J.-B. in reply,—“As Miss Pechey tells me
  that you leave me to decide whether or no to place on our Committee
  your name and Mr. Butler’s, I write to say that I shall most gladly
  avail myself of your permission so to use your names.

  I am glad to say that our Committee is made up of over a thousand
  friends who not only differ widely on the point to which you refer,
  but among whom differences no doubt exist on almost every other
  question, social, political and religious.

  As we cannot hope that even the most conscientious among us will
  always agree on matters of judgment, I am sure that the only wise rule
  is to keep each question distinct by itself, and to welcome for it the
  support of all who care for its success, whether or no they agree on
  other points.

  With kind regards to Mr. Butler, believe me,

                                         Yours truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

The breach was never quite healed. When people care more for great
causes than for personal pleasure and satisfaction, the loss of a friend
must sometimes be taken as part of the day’s work. _Sunt lachrymae
rerum._

Meanwhile the work of propaganda was going on steadily, and, as S. J.-B.
had given up the idea of lecturing in the great towns, she proceeded, as
the next best thing, to publish her lecture, in conjunction with her
historical researches on the subject of Medical Women, in the form of a
small volume.

Just as she was seeing this through the press, news came of the illness
of her Mother, who was visiting the cousins at Bylaugh Park.

                                                           “June 17.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        I am _very_ sorry to hear that you have had such an attack
  again. I should be really unhappy if I did not believe and trust in
  you that you would telegraph for me if you at all wished for me, or if
  you felt really seriously ill. Am I right in so trusting you?

  I am sure they will take all the care they can of you, and I hope you
  will be good and wise enough to eat all you can, broth at first, and
  then as much meat and vegetables as possible—and lots of
  strawberries!—are they ripe yet at Bylaugh?

  You know that I am doing Dispensary work now, and have several
  patients of all kinds to look after, but I envy the doctor that has my
  old lady instead of me.

  If you decide against going to Wales, suppose you come up here
  straight from Norfolk, and we have a quiet month quite alone
  together?—somewhere in the Highlands—if I have to give up Brighton.

  Of course I shall send you your _own_ copy of my new book myself, but
  Miss Pechey will send any quantity more that you may order for giving
  away, etc.

  How good of dear old Auntie to write!

                                             Yours lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

The illness, however, rapidly assumed a dangerous character, and S. J.-
B. was telegraphed for next day.

  “Luckily was up,” she says [she had been ill herself], “and received
  the telegram by 9.50 a.m. Got things packed and off by 10.25 train.
  Thunder and lightning whole way up. Reached Peterbro about 6.30,—Lynn
  9.15. Got a carriage and drove to Swaffham ...—thence to Bylaugh,
  arriving at 2.45 a.m. Crept up to Mother’s room,—she, ‘My darling!’—
  She had been nervous and restless, but slept, holding my hand.

  Oh, the horror of seeing her all shrunk together in bed, hardly
  articulate,—I thought dying.

  And had been very nearly....”

As usual when life was doing its worst, there follow a few blank pages
in the diary,—pages that were to be filled in some day! “I am so glad,”
wrote Miss Jane Cubitt from Fritton,—Miss Cubitt was the “sensible
cousin” of the childhood, who could do equations—“I am so glad that you
have arrived at Bylaugh. I feel now that all that can be done will be
done.” And fortunately on this occasion recovery came more rapidly than
the doctors had thought possible.

S. J.-B. returned to Edinburgh on the 8th July, not a moment too soon.
She was called out to a case the evening of her arrival—having travelled
north by day—and she proceeded forthwith to finish seeing her book
through the press. Law business, too, was urgently claiming her return.
On Wednesday, the 17th July, the historic lawsuit came on before Lord
Gifford.

It must be understood that this lawsuit, though of almost infinite
importance to the women, was in no way a dramatic affair like the last.
In the nature of the case it afforded no sensations to provincial
papers. An Action of Declarator is “for a decree defining and declaring
the right of the pursuer,”[103] and the evidence in Court was given by
Counsel only.

Footnote 103:

  See S. J.-B.’s letter to Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, pp. 356-7.

The women repeated in effect the requests they had so often made to the
University, viz. that the Professors should either receive them as
members of their classes, or else appoint (or recognize) other lecturers
who would. The defence consisted substantially of two pleas: 1. that all
parties are not called (see below); and 2. that the Senatus has not the
power to do what it is asked to do; in other words, (_a_) that the
University existed for men only, and, (_b_) that the University
authorities in making this experiment, had never intended to admit women
to _graduation_. If they did so intend, the intention was _ultra vires_;
and indeed they probably went beyond their powers when in 1869 they
framed regulations admitting women to share their privileges at all.

The hearing of the case lasted two days, and it was fully reported in
the Scottish daily papers of July 18th and 19th. Much of it, of course,
consisted of sheer technical detail that has long since lost interest,
but Lord Gifford’s judgment—delivered eight or nine days after the
hearing of Counsel—was characterized by a grip of the whole situation
and enlivened by a warmth of human interest that make it a landmark in
the history, not only of medical women, but of the whole Feminist
movement. If he allowed his sympathy with the pursuers to appear rather
too clearly, this was surely a fault that, in view of all the
circumstances, may well be reckoned to him for righteousness. The gist
of the judgment is contained in the following sentences:

  “The Lord Ordinary finds that, according to the existing constitution
  and regulations of the said University of Edinburgh, the pursuers are
  entitled to be admitted to the study of medicine in the said
  University, and that they are entitled to all the rights and
  privileges of lawful students in the said University, subject only to
  the conditions specified and contained in the said regulations of 12th
  November 1869: Finds that the pursuers, on completing the prescribed
  studies, and on compliance with all the existing regulations of the
  University preliminary to degrees, are entitled to proceed to
  examination for degrees in manner prescribed by the regulations of the
  University of Edinburgh.”

In the “Note,” the Lord Ordinary discusses the case in detail:

  “It is not easy to over-estimate the importance of the questions
  involved in the present action. The decision may affect, in various
  ways, not only the interests of the pursuers, and of all who are
  similarly situated, but also the future welfare of the University, and
  indirectly the well-being of the community at large who are interested
  in securing the services of thoroughly educated and accomplished
  medical practitioners.

  The Lord Ordinary has endeavoured to approach the consideration of the
  questions dispassionately, and free from all prejudices or
  prepossessions. He has also endeavoured to keep in view that his
  functions are merely judicial and not legislative, and that his duty
  is simply to declare and apply the law as it at present stands, and in
  no way to endeavour to amend it, however strong his convictions of
  what the law ought to be....

  The importance of the question to the present pursuers, and to all
  ladies who, like them, may contemplate the practice of medicine as a
  profession, lies in this, that, by the provisions of the Medical Act
  of 1858 no one is entitled to be registered as a medical practitioner
  without possessing a medical degree from one or other of the
  universities of the United Kingdom, or a licence equivalent thereto
  from certain established medical bodies mentioned in the Act. A
  foreign or colonial degree is not available, and does not entitle to
  registration unless the holder thereof has been in practice in Great
  Britain previous to October 1858. Unless the pursuers, therefore,
  succeed in obtaining degrees, they will be practically excluded from
  the profession of medicine, for they are not in a position to demand
  licences from any of the authorised medical bodies, and it can
  scarcely be expected that they will prosecute their medical studies
  merely in order to be hereafter classed with empirics, herbalists or
  medical botanists, or with those who, in common language, are
  denominated quacks. Without legal registration under the Medical Act
  of 1858, the pursuers would be denied all right to recover fees; they
  would be incapable of holding any medical appointment; and they would
  be subject to very serious penalties if they so much as attempted to
  assume the name or title of medical practitioners.

  It is a fact, whatever may be its effect in law, that no University in
  Great Britain has ever yet granted a degree to a lady. The Medical
  Register of Great Britain only contains the name of two female
  practitioners—Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell and Dr. Garrett Anderson. Dr.
  Blackwell obtained her degree in America, and, being in practice in
  Great Britain before 1858, she obtained registration in virtue of the
  exception in the Act. Dr. Garrett Anderson obtained a licence from the
  Apothecaries’ Hall, London, and is registered as such; but, since her
  admission, regulations have been made which prevent any other lady
  from hereafter obtaining a licence from the Apothecaries’ Hall.
  Accordingly the course pursued by Dr. Blackwell and Dr. Anderson is
  not open to any of the pursuers, and their only hope of being allowed
  to practise medicine in Great Britain rests upon their being able to
  obtain a degree from one or other of the Universities.

  _Practically, therefore, the questions are now raised for the first
  time, Can a lady obtain a medical degree? and, Is any lady to be
  allowed to practise in Great Britain?_”

The Lord Ordinary then discussed the case for the defenders, point by
point: The first plea in law was the technical plea that “all parties
are not called,” or, in other words, that the action should have been
brought, not against the Senatus and Chancellor, but against the
University as a whole.

This question, said the Lord Ordinary, should have been raised before
the record was closed, and settled _in limine_. As a matter of fact,
however, it was of little moment, as the Senatus and Chancellor were the
only parties complained of,—it being assumed that the University as a
whole was ready and willing to do its duty as soon as such duty was
clearly defined. The Chancellor, indeed, had expressed this willingness
so far as he individually was concerned, and, strictly speaking, he need
not have been called as a party.

From the principle on which this preliminary plea was repelled, it
followed that there was in the present action no attempt to impugn in
the slightest degree the existing constitution of the University. Its
existing regulations and ordinances must be taken as right, and the
Senatus must simply be called upon to give effect to these as they
stood.

The Lord Ordinary proceeded to make one or two observations of a general
nature. He was clearly of opinion that, by the law of Scotland, there
was no inherent illegality in women prosecuting the science of medicine,
using the word in its largest sense, or in their engaging in the
practice of medicine as a profession.... Indeed some branches of the
profession were peculiarly appropriate to women and peculiarly
inappropriate to men. For instance, in obstetric practice and in
numerous diseases of women, a male practitioner was singularly out of
place, and nothing but the deadening effect of habit would ever
reconcile the community to that anomaly both in name and in reality, “a
man-midwife.”

Keeping these preliminary observations in view, the Lord Ordinary
proceeded to consider the constitution and regulations of the University
of Edinburgh so far as they related to women:

I. It had been broadly maintained by the Counsel for the Senatus, in a
very powerful and able speech, that the University of Edinburgh was
founded and existed for males alone.

If this proposition were well founded, there was, of course, an end of
the whole case. The Lord Ordinary, however, had felt himself quite
unable to affirm this proposition, but had come ultimately, without any
hesitation at all, to the conclusion that there was no foundation for
this first and general contention of the defenders.

_a._ The charter gave no countenance to this supposition. The masculine
noun or pronoun was used merely in conformity with ordinary brevity and
simplicity of expression.

_b._ The fact that the Universities of Scotland were founded to a great
extent upon the model of Bologna, etc., seemed to show that—as women
were admitted to the Italian Universities—there could have been no
original intention to exclude them from those founded in Scotland.

_c._ It was true that there was no recorded instance of a woman having
taken her degree in Scotland, and this was an argument of some weight,
perhaps considerable weight. If, however, the women had the right
originally, that right would not be lost by the mere fact of non-usage.
The right in their case was _res merae facultatis_, like a man’s right
to build upon his own ground,—a right that is not lost though no
building be erected for hundreds or thousands of years. To extinguish
such a right there must be a contrary usage—a possession inconsistent
with the exercise of the right—and that did not exist in the present
case.

_d._ If there was no express exclusion of women and nothing necessarily
leading to their exclusion, it seemed fair to fall back upon the
inherent legality and appropriateness of the study and practice of
medicine by women, and to infer that a medical school founded in the
University could not have as one of its conditions the exclusion of the
female sex.

_e._ Passing from such general considerations, the Lord Ordinary
considered it quite conclusive of the whole question that, by
regulations lawfully enacted by competent and sufficient authority,
provision had actually been made for the admission of women to the study
of medicine in the University of Edinburgh, and that actually detailed
regulations had been made regulating their studies and examinations.

II. The Lord Ordinary was of opinion that the “regulations for the
education of women in Medicine in the University” of Edinburgh, enacted
by the University Court of 10th November, 1869, and approved of by the
Chancellor on 12th November, 1869, were valid and binding in every
respect, and formed an integral part of the constitution and regulations
of the University as it at present existed. At the debate it was felt on
both sides that these regulations formed almost the turning-point in the
case, and the counsel for the Senatus, sorely pressed by them, had
boldly challenged their legality, maintained that they were _ultra
vires_ of the University Court to enact, and had asked the Lord Ordinary
to treat them as a nullity. Here again the Lord Ordinary thought the
position taken by the Senatus was absolutely untenable.

The regulations in question were solemnly, after much discussion, after
long consideration, and after due communication with the whole governing
bodies of the University, enacted by the University Court, a body which
had very large and almost legislative powers. The regulations were
enacted with all the required statutory requisites. “Due communication”
was had with the Senatus. The matter was submitted to and was duly
considered by the University Council, and the regulations received the
final sanction and approval of the Chancellor. The Senatus, the
University Court and the University Council had all the benefit of the
very highest legal skill and experience. Most eminent lawyers were
members of all these bodies; and the Chancellor who put the seal of his
approbation and sanction to the regulations held with universal
acceptance the very highest judicial office in Scotland.... So satisfied
had the Senatus been of the validity of the regulations, that they had
actually applied to the enacting power—that is, to the University Court—
to rescind them. The University Court had refused to rescind the
regulations and they still stood part of the law of the University.

III. The Lord Ordinary was of opinion that the pursuers were entitled in
substance to the declaratory decree which they demanded in the present
action....

The right to medical graduation was really at the foundation of the
whole of the present dispute. If the ladies had been content to study as
mere amateurs—as mere dilettanti—it rather appeared that no question
would ever have been raised. But their demand for degrees, and the
announcement of their intention to practise as physicians, had aroused a
jealousy which the Lord Ordinary was very unwillingly obliged to
characterize as unworthy, and hence this strife.

The Lord Ordinary was of opinion, without any doubt at all that the
proposal to withhold from successful or fully accomplished female
students the regular degrees, and to give them instead mere certificates
of proficiency was incompetent as well as unjust. The proposal was not
unnaturally stigmatized by the pursuers as “a mere mockery.”

IV. All this, of course, had reference to the declaratory conclusions.
Beyond that the Lord Ordinary could give no help. The first petitory
conclusion asked that the Professors be directed to admit women to their
ordinary classes; but this, as Lord Gifford pointed out, was more than
the Senatus had power to do, and the University Court could only do it
by altering regulations which the present judgment had assumed to be
right. The University Court, however, had undoubted power to recognize
extra-academical teachers; and—as teachers of unquestionable standing
and ability were ready to give the pursuers instruction in separate
classes—as, moreover, the University had only been held back by a doubt
as to its own powers—the Lord Ordinary hoped that this solution would
terminate the unfortunate controversy which had raged so long.

                  *       *       *       *       *

S. J.-B. records the result very briefly in her diary:

  “Friday, July 26th. Lord Gifford’s judgment. Affirms declaratory
  conclusions, i.e. full rights,—denies petitory conclusions, i.e. says
  action so framed that he could not make order on Senatus.

  Gloria tibi, Domine!

  Substantially the whole cause won for all women, I believe.

  His note too good to be easily set aside. _May_ be fresh delay—hardly
  defeat.”

In any case it was a great and inspiring judgment,—almost enough to
atone to S. J.-B. at the moment for all she had come through; for it
must not be forgotten that the epoch-making enactments of November 1869,
on which almost everything turned, had been won by her own bow and
spear, practically before any other woman student had appeared upon the
scene.[104] Well might she cry, “Gloria tibi, Domine!”

Footnote 104:

  See p. 260.

And within a few days a great pæan of rejoicing rang out over the land,—
rejoicing that was to spread over the whole civilized world. Once more
the postman was a delightful visitant. Indeed, as one reads the letters,
one is fain to retract the dictum that this lawsuit was in any way
devoid of dramatic interest.

The telegraph boy came first, with a characteristic message from Mrs.
Kingsley:

                “A thousand congratulations. How is R.C.”

                                            “Eileanach,
                                                  Inverness.
                                                         July 31/72.

  DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        A paragraph in the _Daily Telegraph_ of the 30th made me
  surprise sitters-by, by exclaiming ‘Thank God,’...

  It is almost too good news to be true, although those not versed in
  legal quibbles felt that your claim was both legal and equitable, and
  _must_, in due time, be conceded. Yet, I would thankfully learn that
  the case is ended, and that there is to be no appeal to keep it open
  longer.

  I mean to be in Edinr. (Cockburn Hotel) on the 8th August, and will
  that day try to see and congratulate you on the blessed determination
  you have shown, all along, not to be put down by mere brute, unmanly
  force, but to compel justice to be done.

  I am grieved that this should have cost you and your friends such
  shameful trouble and expense, but know, that this loss to you, will be
  the cause of myriads of dear women thanking God for having won a
  victory that will do more for their welfare and happiness, temporal
  and spiritual, than is now perceived but by a very few....

  May God be with you and your friends, and speedily fill the land with
  true women like you, so that no woman may need to keep secret for an
  instant a single pain, because she can only tell it to men.

                          Very sincerely yours,
                                                 J. MACKENZIE, M.D.,
                                                        Provost.”

                                                “Wednesday, July 31.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Will you allow me to add my hearty congratulations to those with
  which I doubt not you are now being overwhelmed, on the success of
  your brave and patient conflict with prejudice and injustice? I think
  the question is now practically settled.

  Thanks for your kind letter. I am very glad you liked St. Andrews.
  Believe me with much respect,

                               Yours very sincerely,
                                                     A. K. H. BOYD.”

The letter that follows is from one who was to become an invaluable
champion.

                                                 “16 Wimpole Street.
                                                      July 27.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Allow me to congratulate you most heartily on the decision of
  Lord Gifford, which establishes the rights of the lady students at
  Edinburgh.

  I will do what I can to get your interesting little book noticed in
  the _Lancet_.

  I do hope that the Conservative party in the profession will now have
  the sense to give way with a good grace.

            Believe me, dear Miss Jex-Blake,
                                        Yours very truly,
                                                FRANCIS ED. ANSTIE.”

The next is in the shaky handwriting of an invalid:

  “MY DARLING,

        I was so delighted to have your letter with the grand news. I
  had not dared expect anything so good. From my heart I thank God and
  rejoice. I feel so comfortably well, no aches or pains whatever. May
  God bless and prosper my darling.

                                                 YOUR LOVING MOTHER.

  Shall I give a copy to Nurse of _the_ book when we part?”

                                             “Riffelberg.
                                                    July 30th. 1872.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        I am delighted to see in _Times_ of 27th, just arrived, that
  Lord Gifford has given a judgment entirely in favour of yourself and
  the other lady students. I congratulate you heartily and only hope it
  is final.

  I am here 8,400 ft. above the sea, having found it impossible to get
  fresh in England, ...

  I hope your legal perils are over; and, though one has regretted that
  so much legal work prevented your own medical start, it has been well
  worth all you have gone through, or yet may go through, to open the
  Profession thoroughly to women.

  As soon as you have completed your training, you have in my opinion
  nothing but success before you: and, within 12 months of settling in
  London as a properly qualified Physician, you will find it easy to
  make £2000 a year, and impossible to avoid doing a very large amount
  of good in making it....

                         Your affectionate brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

It was on the occasion of this visit to Switzerland that Mr. Jex-Blake
made the acquaintance of Miss Agnes M‘Laren—on the top of the Eggishorn!
It chanced one day that he ran down from the summit to assist a fragile
little lady up the last steep climb, and, in the course of subsequent
conversation, lent her a guide-book, in which, to her great surprise,
she found the familiar name of Jex-Blake.

So the Eggishorn heard all about it.

Yes, friends were kind, and more than kind; but, as before, the “man in
the street” rejoices one’s heart:

                                          “Glasgow. 30th July, 1872.

  DEAR LADY,

        I beg respectfully to convey my sincere thanks to you for the
  gallant stand which you have made against those parties whom I may
  term Medical Monopolists, and to express my delight at the success
  which have attended your efforts.

  Your address and ability in thwarting the selfish purposes of said
  parties have endeared you to every liberty loving individual in the
  civilised world, and I sincerely hope you will long be spared to
  benefit suffering humanity by your experience and knowledge—knowledge
  which you have pursued under such tremendous difficulties, but the
  possession of which cannot fail eventually to raise you to the very
  pinacle of your profession.

                                 I am,
                                       Yours very respectfully, ...”

The following lines, written and sent to S. J.-B. a few months later by
a well-known Edinburgh citizen, may be taken as a sample of much clever
and spirited doggerel on both sides of the question:

                     “I do rejoice, Miss Jex,
                     The gods have heard your Prex,
                     To vindicate your Sex,
                     By passing a new Lex,
                     Though that does sadly vex
                     Professor C., senex,
                     Who plays the part of Rex,
                     But may become an Ex,
                     Because he won’t annex
                     The females to his Grex.”




                               CHAPTER XV
                            PAYING THE PRICE


All through that autumn S. J.-B’s mind must have been simply seething
with the manifold interests that claimed her attention.

  “If anybody ever deserved a rest, you do,” writes Miss Stevenson, “and
  I most earnestly hope you will take a thorough one. I do not think
  _any of us_ are able fully to realize the importance of Lord Gifford’s
  decision to all men and women in all time coming.”

  “I am truly glad that something is definitely settled at last,” writes
  Miss Bovell from Paris, “and not least for _your_ sake. I do trust you
  may have much less worry in future, though I fear the ‘separate
  classes’ will still prove a source of trouble. Perhaps some time hence
  the British Medical Profession, as well as the British Public, may be
  sufficiently advanced to throw aside the unscientific scruples which
  happily appear to have no existence here....

  I suppose you will be going in for your Professional in October? I
  wish you all possible honours. I trust your mind is now sufficiently
  at ease for you to work at books, but you will take a holiday in the
  country first, will you not?”

The difficulty of arranging classes was so great that a good many of the
students had scattered for the summer months. Mrs. Chaplin Ayrton, as
well as Miss Bovell, was in Paris; Miss Massingberd Mundy and Miss Dahms
had gone to Dr. Lucy Sewall at Boston, and Miss Pechey was working at
the Lying-in Hospital in Endell Street.

  “Oh, Lucy, I’m so tired of it all!” S. J.-B. had written to her friend
  a month or two before this. “When those children went to you a
  fortnight ago, I did so wish I could have gone and been rested and
  nursed for a few months!

  But I’m sure you will see how utterly without choice I am,—that I
  _must_ stay at my post as long as I can stand.

  But I am getting more and more doubtful whether I myself shall ever
  finish my education. I think when once the fight is won, I shall creep
  away into some wood and lie and sleep for a year.

  However all that is beside the question.”

A letter from Miss Pechey—written in September—takes a sterner tone than
is her wont. After reporting about her work at Endell Street, she goes
on:

  “You have never told me how you are getting on with your exam.
  subjects; such silence is very ominous, and I’m afraid you haven’t
  been doing anything at them. You really must, if you intend to go up
  in October, for it is by no means child’s play getting up three such
  different subjects, and it would be simply _awful_ if you went up and
  didn’t pass....”

Here the writer has obviously dried the ink, and sat looking at the
space that remained, appalled, we may suppose, by the contingency she
has called up.

“Don’t you like me to lecture you?” she concludes finally, and passes on
to another subject.

There certainly were not many people who dared to ‘lecture’ S. J.-B. The
mingled love and fear with which her juniors (and not her juniors only)
regarded her scarcely comes out in the correspondence, though one gets
more than a glimpse of it in the following letter from one of the two
who went to Boston, the humourist and _enfant gâtée_ of the little
circle:

  “DEAR MISS PECHEY,

        I write to you for several reasons, the one chiefly worth
  mentioning being that I want you to give some messages to Miss Jex-
  Blake, as, however busy you are, you are not likely to be so busy as
  she is, and therefore a letter is less waste of time to you. I believe
  though at the bottom of my heart that my real reason is that I am,
  even away from her, frightened of her. See how deep the feeling is.
  (The writer proceeds to relate a perfectly fantastic dream.)

  Miss Jex-Blake, as you know, has written to Dr. Sewall, advising me to
  stay in Boston this winter; the Dr. is so good as to say she will keep
  me with her, and I am quite willing to stay, so unless my father and
  mother object, that is settled....

  What joyful news that lawsuit news has been. I have had letters of
  rejoicing from many folks, but I declare I am chiefly glad for Miss
  Jex-Blake’s sake, and I hope now she sees some prospect of a quiet
  winter. Of course there is still much to do, but she has put a great
  piece of the road behind her. Is it not so? And I assure you the
  general question was becoming lost to sight by me in the particular
  one of her success and rest.

  If Miss Jex-Blake comments on my hand, tell her I do write my copies,
  I do remember her rules, and only fall into this style when a little
  tired as at present....

  I have seen now Dr. Sewall use forceps three times, and it is
  impossible to see anything prettier.... She uses any sort of
  instrument beautifully. I should like to see her conduct some large
  operation. I think well-done surgery is fascinating, and I never saw
  anyone handle an instrument so easily and so securely. I should feel
  safe whatever she was going to do to me or mine....”

Of course S. J.-B. saw the letter,—though the dream was a most audacious
one—and it made her quite homesick for the old Boston life.

  “DEAREST LUCY,” she writes,

        “It is just a year since we parted, and I do so want to see you
  again. Miss —— makes me quite envious with her descriptions of her
  happiness in Boston and of the goodness of ‘my doctor.’ Will you come
  over with her in the spring?...

  I am just going to set hard to work for 5 weeks in preparation for my
  1st Professional Exam., which comes off about October 22nd. It would
  never do for _me_ to be plucked! In fact I shall not go in unless I
  feel pretty well prepared when the time comes. Please thank Miss Call
  for her note to me, and tell her I wish she could have come to
  Edinburgh.”

She did set to work hard, but events could scarcely be called
propitious. On the strength of Lord Gifford’s judgment, she was renting
a small house to serve as a medical school, arranging for the winter’s
course of teaching; and, especially, trying to get an Anatomy lecturer
recognized by a body of men, who—rightly or wrongly—did not mean to
recognize him. Meanwhile editors showed themselves increasingly glad to
get her work—journalistic work—not only on subjects connected with her
special struggle, but about anything that called forth her gift for
clear and incisive writing: and all the money she could earn in this way
was not only welcome, but actually needed to keep things going. Although
she was extraordinarily economical, as we have seen, her generosity and
her large and businesslike way of dealing with things always gave the
impression of larger means than she possessed; and many appealed to her
for help who would have been amazed to learn how narrow her margin was.

  “I am glad of both your articles,” writes Mr. Russel about this time,
  “but the _beginnings_ of both are de trop.

  If I see a topic you would care to handle, I shall be prompt to let
  you know.”

  “I am much obliged by your MS., which will duly appear as a leader
  tomorrow,” writes another editor.

Her book, too, was exciting no small interest, and the consequent
letters, enquiries and reviews[105]—very lengthy reviews in some cases—
were a preoccupation in themselves. Any day might bring the opening up
of a new vista.

Footnote 105:

  The following is a fair average specimen of the cordiality with which
  the book was received:—“So convincing is the argument, so obvious the
  conclusions to which it leads up, that one fairly wonders, after
  putting down the essay in which they are enforced, how it should have
  come to pass in this nineteenth century that it should be necessary
  for any such essay to be written.”—_Liverpool Mercury._

                                                        “Sept, 11th.

  DARLING MOTHER,

        I have but a moment to send you a piece of news that I know will
  be very welcome, viz, that A Scotchman resident in India called on me
  last night, asked how matters were progressing, said the battle was
  being gallantly fought, and departed after stating mildly that he
  would send us ‘a thousand pounds at once and more if needed,’ that the
  fight might not fail for want of money! The money is worth a great
  deal, but the moral effect is almost more, as the man is an absolute
  stranger and cares simply for the principle.

  Probably now we shall get a lot more.

                                            Yours lovingly,
                                                               SOPH.

  His name is Walter Thomson, he had just read my book. (Not a bad 2s.
  6d. worth, was it?)”

It is impossible to exaggerate the reverence—“respect” is too weak a
word—with which S. J.-B. throughout life treated the money that came to
her in this way. It was infinitely more precious to her than possessions
of her own: and the amount of the donation made no difference. If it was
not to be used immediately, it was invested with the greatest care and
forethought; every penny was strictly accounted for; and no farthing
expended on administration, or on any kind of work involved (railway
journeys and so forth), was allowed to come out of the fund itself.
There never were any “working expenses.” All that was done for love.

More gifts on this scale did not follow forthwith, but her lecture and
the book that followed it were bringing in a return that was worth even
more. They were arousing interest among men who might be able to assist
the cause in a bigger way than had yet suggested itself.

  “I wonder,” writes Miss Wolstenholme, “whether you are aware how
  deeply interested Mr. Stansfeld is in your question, and how warmly
  disposed to help you by legislation or in any other way.”[106]

Footnote 106:

  Mr. Stansfeld was President of the Local Government Board.

There follow a number of suggestions as to the amendment of the Medical
Act of 1858.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile the University had appealed to the Inner House against Lord
Gifford’s judgment, and—after hanging fire for long months—the case at
this juncture became imminent.

It was in the midst of all this that preparation for the professional
examination went on.

Of course the task ought not to have been a formidable one. S. J.-B. had
done excellent class-work in the subjects required, and they had been
simmering in her mind for years; but everyone who has watched the career
of many students knows that that man stands the best chance of
acquitting himself well who, having got his subject up, goes in for the
examination straightway, before the natural process of selection and
assimilation in his own mind emphasizes this item and discards that, as
the case may be. The knowledge one wants for an examination is not the
knowledge that becomes one’s working equipment for life.

The “last straw” for S. J.-B. was the distressing illness of a very dear
friend in the course of those five precious weeks, and finally we come
without surprise to the following entry in the diary:

  “Sunday, Oct. 6th. Rather out of heart. I can’t get courage or sense
  for the Organic Chemistry, and must leave it till E. P. comes; and the
  Botany seems so desperately voluminous! My head seems tired,—I _can’t_
  make it work more than an hour or so at a time,... But somehow my
  fatalism makes me think I _shall_ get through, when E. P. comes and
  quiets me,—she comes Thursday, 10th.”

  “Oct. 11th. I’ve had such bother about Anatomy rooms, etc., and shall
  have to organize about Fund, etc.

  Things seem to _crowd_ on me so. And other people get such nice long
  holidays!—oh, dear! Well, as Robertson says, everything has its
  price....

  Then H. [the Anatomy teacher]. The Court refused him flat on Monday,
  on ground of ‘no evidence of qualification’! He on Tuesday is to send
  in his diplomas and other testimonials, and I have to get them copied
  and printed, etc.

  My own Botany stuck fast,—I nervous and shaky again,—feeling strength
  go out of me drop by drop.

  If only the 22nd were _well_ over!

  E. P. came back yesterday, dear child,—so loving and good.”

At this point S. J.-B. breaks off to record the—very indifferent—
achievements of the new students in their preliminary examination!

  “Oct. 22nd. Professional Exam.... Did good paper in Nat. Hist.,—fair
  in Chemistry, poor in Botany. Went down to Falkirk to sleep.[107]

  “Oct. 23rd. Came up for Practical Chemistry Exam. White Millar met me
  and worried me for [law] papers. Head dazed,—Crum Brown let me up [?
  off] till another day.”

Footnote 107:

  To visit the friend who had been ill.

Well, there is no use in “spinning out the agony.” S. J.-B. was rejected
in her examination. With a mental endowment obviously far above the
average in either sex, she found herself, after all these years of
study,—so far as any practical result was concerned—absolutely at the
foot of the ladder. She had nothing whatever to show for her work: she
had failed in a test that almost any schoolboy can pass,—and the eye of
the civilized world was upon her.

There is no denying that it was bad to bear, and the tragic part of the
matter was that she could not bring herself to believe that—in the
subject of Natural History at all events—her paper had been fairly
treated. So many petty difficulties had been thrown in her way all
along, so little magnanimity had been shown her by some of those in
authority, that her fighting instinct rose almost automatically to the
encounter. What could this be but simply one effort more on the part of
the enemy to defeat her _per omne fas et nefas_?[108]

Footnote 108:

  See extract from _Lancet_, p. 319.

About this time Professor Huxley seems to have expressed to some mutual
friend his sympathy with the women students; he had refused—quite
definitely, but with obvious regret—to come to their assistance by
examining their proposed Anatomy lecturer[109] when the University of
Edinburgh refused to do so; and Miss Pechey now took upon herself the
difficult task of asking his opinion upon the Natural History paper. It
was a great venture from every point of view, and certainly shows how
confident S. J.-B. was in her view of the case.

Footnote 109:

  See _Huxley’s Life_, i. 387.

“_Vor den Wissenden sich stellen_—” is an admirable motto, but the
standard of examination in Natural History in Edinburgh at that time was
certainly not the standard demanded by London now, and many a creditable
Edinburgh student of those days might have cause to congratulate himself
that he was not examined by Huxley.

  “He was very kind about it,” writes Miss Pechey, “and I had a long
  talk with him. He thought it would be difficult for H. to get anyone
  to examine him, as even Ellis would not like to constitute himself an
  examiner. I think he has rather altered his idea of the honesty, etc.,
  of the Edinr. Professors, but he said such conduct was inexplicable to
  him. However, although I expect he thought I’ was giving him a one-
  sided statement, I think he considers us the aggrieved party.

  At first he would not look at the papers, but when he had asked me
  about them, he said he would look over the Natural History, and
  although he was very kind about it, his verdict was unfavourable. Of
  course I have no doubt that they would have passed a _man_ on your
  paper, but still you must have them extra good before you can make any
  fuss about it....

  I hope you won’t worry yourself about the papers, as I hope we shall
  have plenty of leisure so that we can go over the subjects again in a
  proper way: it would have been a wonder if you could have passed in
  the midst of all that worry.... God bless you, darling.”

As we know S. J.-B. had more worries on hand than the sore question of
her examination papers. The Appeal in the famous case of Miss Jex-Blake
_v._ the Senatus was really before the Court of Session now, and she was
“up till past 12 revising the proofs” for the daily papers.

  “Sunday, Nov. 3rd. Word from E. P. (who went to London Wednesday) that
  Huxley didn’t approve my Nat. Hist. paper. So fight for ‘pluck’ given
  up.

  Poor Nelly O’B. lost her father a few weeks ago.”

Apparently she wrote to report progress to her brother the same day.

                                      “The College,
                                           Cheltenham. Nov. 4. 1872.

  MY DEAR SOPHY,

        You have come to the right decision without a doubt. Probably
  they were sharp upon you, but to _prove_ injustice in an examiner is a
  hopeless task. They are evidently very bitter, and apparently not
  scrupulous; but to my mind that was not the point; for, in writing to
  you[110] I had only to consider what was the wise course for you; and
  it seemed to be exactly what I advised and what you have done.

  I am very sorry, and so is Hetty, for the mishap and the loss of time:
  but you can turn it to benefit: and all’s well that ends well, as your
  cause will end certainly.

                              Your affectionate brother,
                                                        T. W. J.-B.”

Footnote 110:

  The previous letter has not been found.

                                                      “The Elms.
                                               Monday, 4th November.

  MY PRECIOUS DARLING,

        I am not all surprised, and so glad to hear that there is
  another opportunity in April. I had said I had no doubt they would
  floor you if they could. Your mind and time have been so engrossed
  that you cannot be very angry with yourself. I quite think I have felt
  for you more than you have for yourself....”

  [The dear old Mother, with the sword in her heart!]

  “I am getting on so nicely here. I hope you will not have any lawyers
  to consult with about other pressing matters, nor articles to write
  when you take up study for April. I shall like to know when you begin
  (probably not till February) that I may ask help where it is promised
  to be given. I hope my darling has a little breathing time now, and
  will take every care of herself, as I will of her baby.

                             Ever your loving Mummy,
                                              MARIA EMILY JEX-BLAKE.

  It is best for me to write little.”

[Illustration:

    _Henry J. Wells 1862_
  _Emery Walker ph. sc._
  _Maria Emily Jex-Blake_
  _from a drawing in chalks by H. T. Wells R.A. 1862_
]

Meanwhile enquiries poured in on every side. The following paragraph
appeared in a well-known Weekly:

  “The question of the admission of Women to medical degrees in
  Edinburgh University has been rather unexpectedly solved, at least for
  the present. Miss Jex-Blake, a foremost champion of the movement, has
  actually been ‘plucked’ in her examination and sent back to complete
  her scientific studies.”

This paragraph was cut out and sent to S. J.-B. by other papers and by
many individuals as well, with a request for an explanation, or, as they
graciously put it, “for the means of authoritatively contradicting it.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Norfolk cousins who had been mildly loyal and sympathetic at a distance,
were roused to positive incredulity. The delightful Sarah of the
girlhood reverts to the old affection and the old playful names:

                                                      “Wimbledon.
                                                          Dec. 14th.

  DEAR OLD MAN,

        I want you to write and tell me all about yourself, and why you
  did not pass your examinations. There must be a reason why you did
  not. I want you to tell me, for I hear all sorts of things, and want
  to know the truth. Send me a Scotch paper about you, for I never see
  anything in the English papers for or against you—only facts [!]...

  Write to me like a good man.

                               Ever your affectionate,
                                                      S[ARAH] J.-B.”

Yes, things were pretty black. So black that one is not in the least
surprised to hear that at this time Miss M‘Laren decided to throw in her
lot with the women students. Retiring and delicate though she was, the
following letter written on one of her propagandist Suffrage tours, is
evidence that she brought sufficient moral grit to the new life:

                                         “Strachie, [?] Argyllshire.
                                              Nov. 10th. 1872.

  I wish so much that you could have joined us yesterday by balloon, so
  as to have had this delicious day in the country,—besides the pleasure
  of being together. The pure air would have refreshed you very much,—
  and it is so lovely. Yesterday it rained in torrents.... I was so glad
  you were not with us, for I found I had promised more than I could
  perform,—only a pleasant drive of two hours! Imagine our horror when
  we found that the steamer advertised to sail from Helensburgh to
  Dunoon was broken down and could not go,—and we were told that it
  would be impossible for us to manage the journey. Of course we _had_
  to find out a way to go, and it was to drive 3 miles, then to ferry,
  then to drive 4 miles, then to catch a steamer, then to have the 2
  hours’ drive originally expected! ... and only to reach this at 7—half
  an hour after hour of meeting!

  It was out of the question to put meeting off, for there was no
  telegraph, and the people had come 6, 8, or 9 miles. They knew
  something must have happened to delay us, and waited patiently. We had
  to hurry to the meeting, and found a large schoolhouse crowded with
  people, and some half dozen dogs, and dimly lighted by 8 candles! It
  was _so_ funny! And they were so enthusiastic....

  I have been thinking a great deal about joining you, and the
  conclusion I have come to is to tell Papa and Mama that I would like
  to _try_ to study if they would give their consent.

  If I felt I had a vocation for medicine, it would make me bolder, but
  you know that I cannot honestly plead that. On the contrary I have
  very grave doubts of my capacity for it, especially for the
  preliminary years of study, and they might very probably prove to be
  lost years....

  No, the attractions to me would be a definite sphere, and an
  independent one, and being associated with you in work of any kind.

  It would be a great happiness to me to be with you, and to believe
  that I was a help to you however small.

  But then, I cannot but believe that you must before long have the
  greater help of having Miss Du Pre with you, and, in the meantime,
  till she can come, you may be sure I will be as much as possible with
  you.”

A delightful correspondence ensued between Miss M‘Laren and Miss Du Pre,
who knew each other but slightly:

  “As you cannot be with Sophy,” writes Miss M‘Laren, “I would like very
  much to be with her, for she does really deserve all the help she can
  get when she has so much to do.... It would, as you know, be a great
  happiness to me to be with her, but I would not mind for myself at
  all. If you could only be with her, I would be quite happy not to be,
  feeling that it was not right for me to risk making family discomfort,
  just for myself. What do you honestly think? I would not of course
  think of troubling you about my concerns except as they concern
  Sophy.”

  “All my instincts are against causing family sorrow and trouble,”
  writes Miss Du Pre in reply. “... but I cannot but think that in your
  case the trouble would not be permanent.

  I think myself that studying new and difficult sciences and trying to
  help Sophy at the same time would be more than your strength would
  stand,—at least I know I could not do it myself. Though, on the other
  hand, it might be still more difficult to study at home where all
  sorts of family habits and calls upon one’s time make it so hard to do
  anything thoroughly.

  I believe, if I were you, I would try to wear away by degrees the
  opposition of my parents, perhaps by going to help Sophy for a month
  or so, and then coming home again, being willing in the meantime to be
  present at any dinner party when they particularly needed my help,
  etc. I do think that people hate a plan so much less when the thought
  of it is no longer new and startling to them.... I cannot express to
  you how glad I shall be if you can see it to be right to go to Sophy,
  for I think your presence and help are exactly what she needs and
  needs sorely too. But you must not think that I _only_ care about it
  for her sake, for it would be a great pleasure to me to think that you
  were enjoying her company and friendship.”

Of course Miss M‘Laren carried her point, and, if she never quite
succeeded in persuading herself of her “vocation,” she left a large
_clientèle_ of patients in no doubt at all upon the subject.




                              CHAPTER XVI
                     END OF THE BATTLE IN EDINBURGH


The year 1873 is not one of the most dramatic in the history, but no
other has a more impressive record of work done, of resolute
determination to try every door, and to _keep on trying_.

It was becoming increasingly clear that—whatever the immediate issue of
the lawsuit might be—a wider appeal must be made. Even S. J.-B. began to
see that “no decision in our favour can give us the good will of the
Medical Faculty”; and Mr. Stansfeld’s warm and appreciative interest in
the question seemed to open a new door of hope. From this time forward
the recurrence of his fine clear handwriting in the correspondence
(brief though his letters are) is a constant reminder of how “Providence
rescues and saves His elect inheritance” as “the dear Newman” would have
said, though in another connection.

Mr. Stansfeld knew Professor Masson well, and probably began his
acquaintance with S. J.-B. in no ignorance of her _défauts_,—the
_défauts_ that made so many timorous; but, like Masson, he was a strong
man; like Masson he thought Carlyle was right in holding that “on the
whole we make too much of faults”; and to the end of the long history he
rejoiced wholeheartedly in the magnificent acumen and strength of Sophia
Jex-Blake.

S. J.-B. had made his acquaintance at the time of her lecture, and now,
after some little correspondence, she saw him again, and received his
introduction to some of his colleagues.

We quote from diary:

  “Dec. 10th [1872] To London. At Cordery’s till 13th.

  11th Wednesday. Saw Stansfeld at Whitehall. Then Simon, who, though
  not very sanguine as to value of women doctors, is quite clear they
  must have a chance. Suggests that the Colleges _could_ not refuse to
  examine us. Lord Ripon also kindly,—quite inclined to make Medical Act
  as dependent as possible on Registration. Lowe marvellously civil.
  Very glad to see me, was quite clear it was a case for legislation. If
  we lost the lawsuit, he would consult with Stansfeld, and do all he
  could.

  Tuesday, 17th. (Dear old man’s birthday,—would have been 82!) To
  Yaxham. Mother fairly well.

  For next 10 days stayed much in bed, read _Gil Blas_, etc., in utter
  dearth of books. Worried by letters and telegrams from Edinburgh.

  Thursday 26th. Started back for Edinburgh. Carriage to myself whole
  way. Arrived

  Friday 6 a.m. Slept an hour or two. Then 4 hours’ cab and canvassing;
  and so on for next week.”

  “Monday, Jan. 6th. 1873. Infirmary meeting. We apparently beaten by
  279 to 271—pending scrutiny. Turner and Lister waved hats and
  hurrahed!”

  “Feb. 10th. The piety of the Infirmary Managers actually obliged them
  to turn us out of Sunday visit, at least ‘for the present.’ Cowan[111]
  delightfully indignant for once at ‘breach of faith’.

  Feb. 16th. He went to Infirmary during Sunday visit; and went away,
  telling Mrs. Thorne oracularly that ‘he had seen quite enough for his
  purpose’.

  Feb. 17th. Monday. He made a tremendous row at Managers’ Meeting. Said
  that the previous day he had visited the wards and ‘had never seen a
  more truly Christian, more truly Sabbatic sight, than the ladies at
  the sick-beds.’ By 10 to 6 votes in again.”

Footnote 111:

  Lord Provost.

Such were the ups and downs of daily life.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The question was raised at this time of having one or more women on the
School Board, and S. J.-B. took up the matter enthusiastically. It was
useless to remind her that she had more than enough on her hands
already. Here was a matter in which she really could serve. And a great
occasion it proved. Even those who were children at the time have not
forgotten the wild excitement in Edinburgh over that election, and the
lift given to the whole woman movement when the two lady candidates—Miss
Phoebe Blyth and Miss Flora Stevenson—appeared on the list second only
to the Roman Catholic priest, who had, of course, all the suffrages of
the faithful.

“You and Miss Blake must have half killed yourselves in getting a
Committee with such names as you have,” Miss Blyth had written.

“If you and Miss M‘Laren had not gone in so strongly for my interests,”
wrote Miss Stevenson, “I should have found myself _very_ much lower.”

So perhaps it was worth while, for the place taken by the women on the
list was a weapon of good fighting force for the future.

It was a helpful distraction too for S. J.-B. herself, and at that
moment the constant pressure of unsatisfactory difficulties and worries—
some few of these latter, of course, created by herself—was very
wearisome. Always something trying to do, and never anything to show for
it,—that was the record of her life at the time. Here is a heart cry
such as one seldom gets from her now:

  “Sunday, May 18th.—Oh, dear!—for some brightness and freshness and
  pleasure to break the long grey wait and work!—Nothing’s wrong,—I’m
  fairly well, and by no means unhappy. I’ve the real essentials of
  happiness,—love and work,—but the fruition of both seems so far away!

  And I want 3 or 4 days of bright sunshine,—rides and drives, ices and
  champagne!—easy luxurious life for a few days’ change.

  Ah, well! Some day I hope to have just such a bright easy home or nest
  somewhere—and to find brain and body workers to take to it for the 3
  or 4 days’ rest and change! How one needs to _experience_ needs in
  order to understand them!”

There are some perhaps who will read this entry with no little feeling
when they remember how, long years after, she realized this ideal in the
home of her retirement, Windydene.[112]

Footnote 112:

  “... And now a flood of memories of sweet Windydene brings tears to my
  eyes. No fear there of rowdy ricsha coolies in a narrow alley
  quarrelling over the right of way—nor rattle of carriages with their
  annoying official bell ‘Clear the way’ up to 2 a.m.—but just silent
  peace. My heaven will certainly have to be silence for a space. But
  Windydene contains ... and the Doctor, and I remember talks over the
  drawing-room fire, and those incomparable evenings in the Doctor’s
  Study, and as these thoughts make one both weepy and sentimental, I
  had better stop.” _Extract from a letter from Dr. Lillie Saville,
  Tientsin, Jan. 7th, 1911._

But the saving sense of humour was never less than dormant. She seldom
has time to quote jokes in the diary now, but here is the very next
entry:

  “May 23rd. From Life of Barham. Dr. Thos. Hume charged 7s. 6d. instead
  of 5s. for death notice, because of ‘universally beloved and deeply
  regretted.’ To surly clerk,—'Congratulate yourself, Sir, that this is
  an expense to which your Executors will never be put!’”

The mood was not quite evanescent, however, for the anxious Mother reads
it between the lines:

                                                  “13 Sussex Square,
                                                       28 May.

  DARLING,

        I fear you were very weary when you wrote; Mother’s heart is
  constantly with her little one, and yearning for some little word of
  her health or her interests. Though I don’t want to be selfish and
  have her write _often_,—when she does write she must mention herself
  and how she is getting on.

  H. [a former maid] is paying me a little visit. She looks very poorly
  and she jumped at my offer to come here for a week.... She asked about
  you, and I lent her your book. She wishes enough there were a lady
  doctor for her to consult.

                              Ever your loving Mummy,
                                                        M. E. J.-B.”

One is glad to know that the women students were having a course of
lectures on Medical Jurisprudence from Dr. (afterwards Sir Henry)
Littlejohn that term,—with all the delightful excursions, topographical
and mental, which that course involved. No one who has had the privilege
of the same experience can regard the history of that summer as a trial
without compensation.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile the lawsuit was dragging its weary course. One cannot be
surprised that the University should have appealed against Lord
Gifford’s decision. If appeal be made to law at all, one must get the
last word of the law,—especially if, in the last resort, public funds
are available to pay for it. There were still lurking possibilities in
that little word “vir,” and it might yet be shown that the University
had done an illegal thing when it admitted the women in the first
instance. If that proved to be so—and it was the _crux_ of the whole
case—the University (so it was argued) must be held excused from all
responsibility towards the women students themselves.

                  *       *       *       *       *

But, if one refrains from blaming the University, one cannot
sufficiently admire the behaviour of the women students as a whole
during those trying days of uncertainty. While the younger members of
the little band were pursuing their education where and how they could,
the seniors were striving on every hand to find some open door or to
unlock one that was closed. Birmingham was at least discussed, with its
possibilities; St. Andrews, Durham, and the various centres in Ireland
were visited and worked diplomatically, and for a time not without
apparent prospect of success. It is pathetic to go through the endless
reams of correspondence—vital once with hopes and fears—that was
destined to end, for the moment at least, in nothing.

In June S. J.-B. and Miss M‘Laren went on a mission to Newcastle, and
they had scarcely left Edinburgh before Miss Pechey, who had just
returned, sent the following report:

                                           “15 Buccleuch Place,
                                                Edinburgh.
                                                    June 17th. 1873.

  DARLING SOPH,

        I was going to write to you yesterday, but was overcome with
  sleep, the result, I suppose, of getting up at 5 o’clock. Last night
  Millar sent a copy of the Consulted Lords’ Opinion with a note to say
  that the case would be put on this week, and that the proceedings
  would occupy only a few minutes—merely formal. He is to let me know
  when it comes on. Ormidale, Mure, Mackenzie and Shand are dead against
  us, contending that the Court had no power to make the regulations.
  Deas, Ardmillan, Jerviswoode and Gifford only in favour of the
  regulations holding good and our right to graduation,—but _not_ a word
  as to the regulations being enforced, and we are still left at the
  mercy of the individual professors.

  ‘That being the case, this coloured individual will take to the
  woods.’ We must look either to Newcastle or St. Andrews. My only care
  now about the decision of the other judges is with regard to the
  expenses....

  I hope the Newcastle people are behaving well.”

Individually they were behaving well of course, and individually the
applicants saw them. Two of S. J.-B.’s drafted petitions have been
preserved:

                              “Station Hotel,
                                         Newcastle. June 19th. 1873.

  GENTLEMEN,

        Relying on the liberality with which the College of Science of
  the University of Durham has been thrown open to women, I venture to
  request that you will pursue a similar liberal policy with reference
  to your College of Medicine, and will admit to it those women who are
  desirous to enter the medical profession, and for whose education
  absolutely no provision exists at this moment in Great Britain.

  If it is thought desirable that separate classes should be established
  in any of the subjects of medical education, I am prepared to
  guarantee for such classes the payment of whatever minimum fee may be
  fixed by you, and I am further in a position to state that, if your
  College is thrown open, at least fifteen women will at once enrol
  themselves as students.

  I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,

                                       Yours obedly,
                                                  SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.”

                                                   “June 23rd. 1873.

  DEAR SIR,

        As I understand that some of the Medical Professors feel a
  difficulty in arranging for the education of women, while others are
  quite ready to do so, I venture to suggest whether it would not be
  possible to admit ladies tentatively for a single term to the classes
  of such teachers as are prepared to receive them, pending a final
  decision of the whole question.

  I think I mentioned to you that those among us who have studied
  longest, have attended all the classes required for the Durham
  licence, except those of Midwifery, Materia Medica and Therapeutics,
  and that if these classes could be given in the winter session they
  might present themselves for the April examination. After the
  experience of such a tentative session, it might with greater
  certainty be decided whether or not permanent arrangements could be
  made.

  Indeed, even if it should be thought impossible to make any such
  partial arrangement for instruction, it might be a matter for
  consideration whether the Medical Council (in conjunction with the
  Durham authorities) might not agree to _examine_ women with a view to
  the licence, if they presented certificates of having attended all the
  necessary classes, and if they paid the fees for one session at
  Newcastle, even without attending classes there, in case such
  attendance should be found impracticable.

  Commending the whole question to the most favourable consideration of
  yourself and your colleagues, I remain,

                                      Yours obedly,
                                                  SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.”

At least she and Miss M‘Laren were not kept waiting long in suspense. On
the very same day the answer was despatched:

                          “University of Durham College of Medicine,
                                     Newcastle on Tyne.
                                                 June 23rd. 1873.

  DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        I am requested to forward you a copy of a resolution passed
  unanimously at an extraordinary meeting of members held today.

  ‘That the members of this College, at an extraordinary meeting, having
  considered the question of opening the Classes of the College for the
  education of women, decide that they cannot consent to the application
  made, either as to education or as to Examination for Licences and
  Degrees.’

                                 I am,
                                       Yours very truly,
                                             W. C. M. ARNISON, M.D.,
                                                      _Secretary_.”

St. Andrews seemed more hopeful. Professor Campbell, as we know, was
more than favourable; so was Professor Baynes; there is a thoroughly
encouraging letter from Principal Tulloch at this time as to the
prospects; and Professor Birrell wrote “in a friendly spirit to the
cause which has been ennobled by the rare spirit with which you and your
friends have fought a hard fight in its defence.”

One wonders whether he had the faintest idea _how_ hard the fight had
been.

In any case opposition proved too strong, and nothing was done at St.
Andrews.

One must remember that the full equipment of the medical side of the
University was a big financial undertaking; and, although the women were
prepared to bear their share, they were naturally unwilling to do this
without some pledge that they would not be left stranded in the first
emergency. Moreover, they were anxious not to lose time, and above all
things St. Andrews was unwilling to be hurried.

Dr. King Chambers urged the women to get their classes somehow—anyhow,
and then to “practise boldly as unregistered practitioners who are ready
to submit to examination when called upon.”

A heroic piece of advice all round. One hopes the unregistered
practitioners would be allowed breathing space “when called upon” to
refresh their recollection—for instance—of the preparations of opium!

Meanwhile Mrs. Thorne was working hard to arrange classes in Edinburgh,
and—failing the University degree—to secure for women the Licence of the
Royal Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons—a privilege which was actually
granted some dozen years later. She and others were also enquiring about
the possibilities of the Apothecaries’ Society of London and the
Apothecaries’ Hall of Ireland, and, with a view to this, S. J.-B. went
the length of securing a legal apprenticeship to her old friend and
teacher, Mr. Salzmann of Brighton, who was most anxious to help her if
he could. In fact no stone was left unturned.

The women students were really so restrained, so admirable, through all
this, that it is a positive relief to come upon the following outburst
some months later from Miss Pechey:

                                             “Langham, Colchester,
                                                 October 12th. 1873.

  MY DARLING SOPH,

        Since I saw you I have indeed suffered many things of many
  physicians, and my temper is no better but rather worse. It is,
  however, gradually working down to its normal again. If I could only
  have spoken my mind when they talked their conceited bosh about their
  infinite superiority, and said,—‘Do you know what a poor fool you are
  making of yourself?’—it wouldn’t have been so hard; but to sit still,
  smiling benignantly, when men, commonplace enough, goodness knows, in
  everything but their uncommon stupidity, boasted of their mental
  capacity!—it was no wonder that, having to bottle it all up, while I
  mused the fire burned. They are so like the fools that David had to
  contend with that I can’t help quoting him.”

  After reporting progress, she goes on: “Still I would not have Mrs.
  Thorne stop in her arrangements for classes in Edinburgh, as I think
  we have no chance, the influence of the medical men being so much
  against us.

  Yes, I am curious. I wonder what it is. Perhaps another hopdog? The
  other died this morning,—poor thing, it had had to go too long without
  food, and even fresh hops did not revive it.

  Please give my love to Scrap....

  I will telegraph to you when I hear from S.

                                              Yours lovingly,
                                                             EDITH.”

Meanwhile the great decision of the Edinburgh Lords had been formally
given. The Lord Justice-General, being Chancellor of the University,
gave no judgment, but the Lord Justice-Clerk and four others, including
all the remaining judges of the First Division were in favour of the
women students. The seven remaining judges, including Lord Mure and Lord
Shand, were against the women students; so the case was lost by the
usual “narrow majority.”

The adverse judgment was based mainly on the opinion that the University
Court had, in 1869, done an illegal thing in admitting women to the
University at all, and on this ground the authorities were held excused
from all responsibility towards the women themselves.

As we look back on the episode after all these years, the point that
stands out is the brave and luminous judgment of the Lord Justice-Clerk,
of which the following is, from our point of view, the most interesting
passage:

  “To deny the women students the degree which was essential to their
  entering the profession, and with a view to which they had studied, on
  the pretext—for it was no better—that no such end was ever
  contemplated, was entirely unjust and unwarranted; and that all the
  more that all the evils said to be connected with the admission of
  females to the University attached only to the study which was
  permitted, while the honour could injure no one, and was only valuable
  as the passport to the medical profession, with which, as a body, the
  defenders had no concern. That this question of graduation, from
  whatever cause, was in reality the sole matter in dispute, was
  sufficiently evident from the pleading of the defenders themselves. No
  doubt they devoted a large portion of their argument to prove that
  women never had been, and never ought to be, admitted to University
  study; but in the sequel they disclosed with sufficient frankness that
  if the pursuers would have contented themselves with mere certificates
  of proficiency, and would have abandoned their claim for graduation,
  they might possibly have fared better. This alternative implied
  university study, and, therefore, as graduation was the cardinal point
  in the case, his opinion was that, on completing the curriculum as
  matriculated students, the pursuers were entitled by the existing
  rules of the University to be admitted to graduation, and, indeed, he
  had found little of argument addressed to prove the contrary. This, in
  his opinion, was sufficient for the decision of this case. It was,
  however, maintained by the defenders that the University Court had no
  power to pass these regulations; they said that by the constitution of
  the University no woman could be admitted either for study or for
  graduation, and that the regulations and all that has followed upon
  them were therefore a mere nullity, and could receive no effect. He
  thought this answer entirely irrelevant. Questions might no doubt
  arise between the superior and subordinate powers in the University as
  to the legality of the former’s orders, and these might legitimately
  be called in question. But, when a student had entered the University,
  and had duly conformed to the rules on the faith of which he entered,
  it would be no defence on the part of the Senatus to his claim to
  graduate that the rules under which he had been admitted were liable
  to legal objection. The duty of the Senatus was to obey the _de facto_
  law of the University, and any other principle would be not only
  subversive of academical discipline, but would lead to the greatest
  injustice, as he thought was the case here. The matriculation of the
  student created an implied contract between him and the University
  authorities that, if he complied with the existing rules, they would
  confer the benefits in the hope of which he resorted to the
  University. They could not, after the student had performed his part
  of the engagement, refuse to fulfil theirs, on the ground that the
  contract was made under rules which it was beyond the power of their
  academical superiors to make. They could not compel the student, as a
  condition of his graduation, to take upon himself the defence of the
  laws of the University; his sole duty was to obey them, and if their
  lawfulness was disputed, that must be done in a question with those
  who made them, not with the student who trusted to them.”

The women students were ordered to pay the expenses of the appeal: and
thus ended the hard fought “Battle in Edinburgh.”




                              CHAPTER XVII
                       THE QUESTION IN PARLIAMENT


How far S. J.-B. was depressed in mind and body by the events of that
wearing fight, we can fairly guess. But nothing had happened to disturb
in the smallest degree her faith,—her philosophy of life. She never
doubted that she was fighting the battle of the Lord; but—greatly though
she hoped, sure though she felt of final victory for her cause—she was
always, in the background of her being, absolutely prepared for the
defeat of any one of her plans. In the thick of the combat, she seemed
so engrossed that comrades and onlookers were wont to say,—“Defeat will
kill her,” but this was a complete misunderstanding of her attitude. The
moment defeat came, it was accepted as simply the will of God, though it
well might be that God still meant her to try again.

In the occasional great affairs of later life it was positively
startling to contrast her apparent inability to recognize another side
to the question at issue with her instant acceptance of an adverse
decision when it came. But for the vital record we now possess of her
youth, most people would have had no clue. She was not ordinarily taken
for a religious woman; but it is simply true that the watchword of her
life—passively and actively—was _Fiat voluntas tua_.

She was one of those who pray; but she would have thought it wrong to
pray for the success of a definite scheme, for the life of a friend,
even—in the hour of her greatest need—for the renewal of a broken
friendship.

And indeed there was always some comfort at hand, quite apart from the
highest philosophy. To the end of her life the words were often on her
lips, “You see we had such _excellent friends_”; and though some few
adherents were estranged because they thought the battle was being
fought too pugnaciously, others became increasingly impressed by the
extraordinary constancy shown by the fighters, and, in particular, by
the protagonist’s rare and individual type of unworldliness, an
unworldliness which, just because it was individual, often made life
rather difficult for her supporters.

Here is a letter from one of the Edinburgh professors, who in the early
days had begged S. J.-B. not to speak harshly of an Alma Mater of which
she would yet be proud, and who, later, had congratulated her on a book
which “tells a very sad and disgraceful story, and tells it clearly and
temperately and effectively,—all the more effectively because your
justifiable indignation is kept well within bounds”:

                                           “Edinburgh, 21 Oct. 1873.

  DEAR MADAM,

        I send you herein a cheque for five pounds towards the law
  expenses of the lady medical students in the recent trial.

  If I had the misfortune to be a member of the University Court, I
  should think myself bound in honour to pay my individual proportion of
  the whole expense incurred by these ladies in consequence of their
  supposing that this learned Court knew the extent of its own powers.
  Horace’s words, ‘_Delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi_,’ may in this
  case be rendered, ‘The University Court blundered, and the Ladies are
  mulcted in the costs.’ If any sense of justice is still extant in this
  country, the result must be, not only the payment of these costs by
  public subscription, but a more than ever energetic agitation for the
  overthrow of male monopoly in the medical profession.

                                   Yours most truly,
                                                      W. B. HODGSON.

  Miss Stevenson.”

Immediately after the legal decision had been given, the _Spectator_
took up the question in an article “Women’s Wrongs at Edinburgh,” of
which the following sentences give the gist:

  “To canvass the legality of the judgment itself is alike beyond the
  present writer’s competency and his wish, though it may be permitted
  to remark that the best known names are found in the minority, and
  that the reasonings on the other side, while turning on a very narrow
  principle, are exceedingly discursive and inconsequent.

  ... The Senate included some staunch friends of the lady students, and
  about an equal number of resolute opponents, but the indifferent
  majority who swayed the action of the body appears to have had no aim
  except to hush up a troublesome affair. Their policy was to do all
  they could to oblige the applicants, meanwhile trusting to the chapter
  of accidents to escape the difficulties that might come after.”

This was shrewd and true.

Within a few days a long and exhaustive review of the position and its
possibilities, from the pen of Mrs. Garrett Anderson, appeared in the
_Times_, in the course of which the writer urged that the time was not
ripe for the medical education of women in Great Britain, and that “in
no way could women better serve the cause we desire to promote than by
going to Paris to study medicine, and returning here as soon as might be
to practise it.” “Never,” she said, “was there a case in which the truth
of the adage, ‘Solvitur ambulando,’ was more likely to make itself
felt.” [In the spirit of Professor Hodgson’s translation of Horace, one
may say, in fact, that “the difficulty might be solved by crossing the
Channel.”]

Of course S. J.-B. did not agree with her, and she wrote a detailed
reply[113] which Jupiter supported with a leading utterance in his own
name. He was not enthusiastic about women doctors at all, but in this
particular difference of opinion he gave his vote for the “equally
deserving, but hitherto less fortunate aspirant to the position of a
legally qualified practitioner.”[114]

Footnote 113:

  Appendix E.

Footnote 114:

  “In this case, as in most others, those who say they want a thing must
  put their own shoulders to the wheel in order to obtain it, and must
  be prepared to back the soundness of their opinions. If only twenty
  women annually could be added to the ranks of the medical profession
  in this country, the expediency of the addition would be speedily
  removed from the domain of controversy, and the expression, ‘Solvitur
  ambulando,’ which Mrs, Anderson calls an adage, would be applicable to
  the case.”

                                         _Times_, August 23rd, 1873.

S. J.-B. knew more of the hidden springs than anyone, and she did not
consider that the time had come to give in. She who had borne the brunt
of so many disappointments was still full of hope. She wanted her own
country to give her this thing. Above all she felt that “so long as no
means of education are provided at home, only a very small number of
women will ever seek admission to the profession.”

“This last consideration,” she says, “was to me conclusive.”

“I greatly admire your letter to Mrs. G. Anderson,” wrote Professor
Hodgson, “and I am truly glad to see that you are not so despondent as I
am. The passive power of resistance on the part of those who hold a
position is terribly difficult to overcome. It is not mere _inertia_;
that would be bad enough. Ultimate success I do not at all despair of,
but individual life is short and the journey is long and arduous.”

Both _Times_ and _Spectator_ spoke severely of the behaviour of the
University, and on September 1st an _apologia_ appeared from the pen of
the Principal. It was just the letter one might have expected from an
able, urbane, scholarly gentleman; he scanned the whole history “as we
do our own poetry, laying stress on the right syllables and passing
lightly over a halting foot.” It would have been a fine and conclusive
defence,—if Jupiter had not allowed a poor overworked medical student to
answer it. The two letters represent two conflicting schools of
historians, the one sweeping, picturesque, probable: the other definite,
statistical, true. The former is certainly the easier to read. The
correspondence is so essentially typical of many of the “disputes” S.
J.-B. had with others in the course of her life that it is given in full
in the appendix.[115]

Footnote 115:

  Appendix F.

“I have seen the Venerable Principal’s letter,” wrote a distinguished
lawyer from Uig, “for even in these uttermost parts of the earth the
_Scotsman_ has reached me, and I need not say what I thought of it. I
read also with great satisfaction your thorough demolition of the
learned and venerable and inaccurate gentleman, and the _Scotsman’s_
excellent punching of his head.”

S. J.-B. spent part of that summer holiday visiting Norfolk cousins, and
she took the opportunity to read a paper on her special subject at the
Social Science Congress at Norwich, under the auspices of her friend,
Professor Hodgson, who was President of the Education Section.[116] Here
she made two friendships of great value,—one with Miss Louisa Hubbard,
whose sister, Lady Rendel, had been S. J.-B.’s schoolfellow; the other,
even more memorable, with Miss Pauline Irby, who was just entering upon
her heroic and self-sacrificing life work in Bosnia. In October S. J.-B.
returned to Edinburgh to clinch the arrangements Mrs. Thorne was making
for the winter session.

Footnote 116:

  Lord Houghton was President of the Congress. In a letter to his wife,
  dated October 3rd, 1873, he says, “Miss Jex-Blake and Mrs. Grey both
  spoke capitally.” Lord Houghton’s _Life_, vol. ii. p. 281.

It is one more instance of the extraordinary, dogged perseverance of
those women that during that winter session the lectures were delivered
to women as before by Edinburgh Extra-Mural lecturers, the subjects
being Materia Medica, Pathology and Midwifery. S. J.-B. attended these
lectures when she could, and took honours in all of them; but she was
already in correspondence with Dr. Anstie and others as to the
possibility of opening some school for women in the larger and more
impersonal milieu of London. As a matter of fact, the whole centre of
interest had changed. The question was now potentially before
Parliament,—not indeed as a question of practical politics to be decided
by the rank and file, but as a matter for private discussion by a few
men of courage and vision.

“It was necessary,” wrote Mr. Stansfeld in reviewing the history three
years later,[117] “to appeal to a yet higher tribunal. Such appeal might
have been made on the question of law to the House of Lords; but that
would have meant further indefinite delay and further heavy expense, and
then, if the result were favourable, a probable refusal of the
university to act on their ascertained powers. It was necessary to
_secure_ the admission of women to medical study and practice, and not
merely to ascertain that one out of nineteen examining bodies could
admit them if it liked. Miss Jex-Blake and her friends determined to
widen their appeal, to base it on the ground of right, and to address it
to Parliament and to public opinion.”

Footnote 117:

  “Medical Women,” by the Right Hon. James Stansfeld, M.P., _Nineteenth
  Century_, July, 1877.

As early as August 1872 Sir David Wedderburn (on behalf of Sir Robert
Anstruther) had moved that the vote for the Scottish Universities should
be reduced by the amount of the salaries of the Edinburgh Medical
Professors. He explained that the motion was brought forward in order to
lay before the House the course followed by the authorities of the
University of Edinburgh, but that, in view of the fact that the Lord
Ordinary, had, a few days before, given a judgment in favour of the
ladies, he hoped the University would accept the decision as final and
as indicating to them their duties in the matter; and he would therefore
refrain from pressing the motion to a division.

When the University appealed against the Lord Ordinary’s decision, and
got it reversed on appeal, Sir David Wedderburn, on July 29th, 1873,
gave notice that he would, early in the following session, bring in a
Bill to grant to the Scottish Universities the power they were now
supposed not to possess, to educate women in medicine and to grant to
them the ordinary medical degrees.

It was highly desirable, of course, to secure Government support for
this Bill, and in October we find S. J.-B. in correspondence with the
Home Secretary. There is a long letter marked “Private” in which Mr.
Lowe (Lord Sherbrooke) expresses his view of the matter, and asks her to
let him know what course she proposes to follow. Shortly after, we get
the following:

                                          “Secretary of State,
                                                  Home Department.
                                                      Oct. 13. 1874.

  MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have done what I can to forward your views. I should think you
  would be met by the same legal difficulty in Ireland as in Scotland.
  But though it may not be very agreeable to my constituents I should
  have no objection if this were the only obstacle to introduce an
  enabling Bill giving all Universities the power if they please to
  confer medical degrees or indeed any other degrees on women.

                                   Believe me,
                                           Very truly yours,
                                                       ROBERT LOWE.”

Clearly she was eager to follow up the opening, for ten days later he
writes again:

  “I am afraid I cannot commit the Government to introducing the Bill
  without consulting them. I will do so at the Cabinets which will take
  place next month and tell you the result.”[118]

  “The matter has been discussed to-day,” writes Mr. Stansfeld on Dec.
  1st, “but nothing is settled; I apprehend difference of opinion....

  I should advise personal communication with members of the Government
  before January Cabinets. A concise but complete and temperate
  statement in favour of legislation would, I think, be useful.”

Footnote 118:

  Mr. Lowe’s advocacy was strengthened by a fine memorial presented to
  him at this time by 471 graduates of the University of London, praying
  that the benefits of the University should be extended to women. This
  memorial was secured through the exertions of Dr. Alfred Shewen.

So, early in January, S. J.-B. went up to London to interview ministers
and others.

  “Jan. 7th. Wednesday. Mr. Lowe, 4 p.m. Very cordial and courteous.
  Would certainly bring in a Bill if his colleagues allowed him,—very
  doubtful if they would,—if not, would help Wedderburn all he could,
  ‘and I can do a great deal.’

  Thought Enabling Bill more hopeful than compelling Medical Boards to
  examine.”

  “Jan. 10th. Saturday. In morning at Museum, looking up Charters of
  Colleges, etc.

  2 p.m. Sir J. Lubbock. Pleasant and friendly,—non-committal rather.
  Would talk with Wedderburn,—‘generally agreed with him.’

  At 4 p.m. Stansfeld. Friendly as ever. Thought Selborne’s opinion most
  important.”

After a few days spent with Mrs. Jex-Blake at Brighton the tale
proceeds:

  “Tuesday, 20th. At 1 p.m. saw Lord Aberdare,—quite friendly,—‘should
  heartily support Bill.’ Was quite willing that Bill should come from
  his office, by Forster.

  2 p.m. Grant Duff, friendly but not encouraging as to his power to
  help with Cabinet.

  Wednesday 21st. Saw Thos. Hughes, 10 a.m. Very friendly. Would speak
  to Forster, etc....

  Thursday 22nd. Breakfasted with the Russell Gurneys. Very friendly. He
  quite ready to put his name on back of Wedderburn’s Bill. On the whole
  encouraged to get special Exam. and practise in spite of Act, if no
  legislation to be got.[119]

  11 a.m. Lady Selborne—‘knew nothing about’ our question,—laughed at
  the idea of my seeing the Chancellor—but listened fairly to what I had
  to say,—seemed impressed by the facts and by the attention of the
  other ministers,—promised to report fairly what I had said.

  Not specially courteous or gracious, but I think honest.”

  “8.30 p.m. express from King’s Cross to Edinburgh.

  Friday 23rd. Illuminations, etc., for Duke of Edinburgh’s wedding day.

  Saturday, 24th. Dissolution! What next?”

Footnote 119:

  “I was very much troubled by your last letter,” wrote Dr. Sewall a
  month later, “for the idea of your beginning to practise without a
  diploma seems to me such a mistake. It appears to me that by
  practising illegally in that way, you will be giving up all you have
  been fighting for, and will be opening a way that some women who have
  not studied thoroughly may use; and there will be no way of your
  showing the public the difference between your qualifications.”

It was only too true. The time of reaction had come after a long period
of reforming energy under Mr. Gladstone, and now—failing to find an
adequate rallying cry for his party—he dissolved Parliament and appealed
to the country. In the confusion of the moment the Home Secretary did
not forget the women students.

  “MY DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I am sorry to say that in the present state of things it is
  quite impossible for me to bring in a Bill on your subject or indeed
  on any other. I don’t think you will find much difficulty in getting a
  man.

  I congratulate you on your brother’s appointment.[120]

                                      Very truly yours,
                                                           R. LOWE.”

Footnote 120:

  To the Headmastership of Rugby.

This was followed on February 10th by a letter from Mr. Stansfeld:

  “DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

  The Conservatives will certainly come in and for a long time. I should
  have thought that Russell Gurney might not improbably now be placed
  upon the Bench. I don’t suppose that a political appointment would
  suit him; unless it were that of Speaker and I have not heard his name
  mentioned for it.

  I think you can’t do better than ask him, saying at the same time that
  you cannot but see that the coming political change may make it out of
  his power to comply.

  It is all very extraordinary and mortifying.

                                     Yours truly,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

The suggested letter was roughly drafted forthwith:

  “To Russell Gurney.

  Will you forgive me if, at such a busy and engrossing time, I venture
  to trouble you about our comparatively small affairs, very important
  as they are to us.

  You are, of course, aware that Sir David Wedderburn is no longer in
  Parliament,[121] and I suppose it is quite certain that the present
  Government must go out, so that Mr. Lowe cannot at least introduce the
  Bill as Home Secretary, and thus on both hands our prospects are at an
  end.

  I venture, however, to rely on the kind interest you expressed in our
  cause, and to ask you whether it would be possible for you to induce
  the Conservative Government to take it up, or, if not, whether we
  might hope for your personal help still farther in the matter,—if you
  do not take office, as I hear you may. I think Mr. Lowe would be
  willing to help us as a private member, and it occurred to me as
  possible that you and he might take up the Bill jointly so as to
  conciliate both sides of the House.

  I am personally very ignorant of political matters, and of what could
  and what could not be done. I shall feel it the greatest possible
  favour if you will kindly tell me how far you can help us in this
  matter, and will give me any advice on the subject which may occur to
  you. It is of extreme importance to us that the Bill should, if passed
  at all, be passed as soon as possible, as it will at any rate be
  difficult enough to make arrangements in time for next winter’s
  session, and we can ill afford to lose another year.

  I trust that you will at least excuse me for thus troubling you.

                                     Yours truly obliged,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

Footnote 121:

  Sir David Wedderburn did not offer himself for re-election.

A most gracious answer to this arrived without loss of time:

                                           “Queen’s Hotel, Hastings,
                                                 13th. Feb.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Although politically opposed to Sir D. Wedderburn, yet for your
  sake and for that of the cause which he so faithfully supported I can
  sincerely regret the loss of his seat.

  I really do not know what course to advise you to pursue. My absence
  from Parliament during nearly the whole of the two last Sessions makes
  it more difficult for me than it would have otherwise have been.

  I should think that it would scarcely be possible to get the new
  Government as a Government to take up the measure. Coming in at the
  time they do they will be sure to take up as few measures as possible.
  If a Bill is brought in by Mr. Lowe or anyone else I would not only
  support it but use any little influence I may have with the Ministry
  to induce them not to oppose it.

  The state of my health is such that I cannot undertake to take charge
  of the Bill. I have come here in order to get a little rest before the
  Meeting of Parliament and I am under positive orders from my doctor to
  avoid all extra work.

  I fear indeed that during the next Session I am likely to be a
  somewhat useless member.

  I shall always be ready to consult with you, though at present I
  confess that I do not see my way.

                              Believe me,
                                      Very sincerely yours,
                                                    RUSSELL GURNEY.”

It was characteristic of the vicissitudes of S. J.-B.’s life at the time
that within a few days of receiving this letter she had a telegram from
Mrs. Jex-Blake’s physician at Brighton: “Your Mother is very poorly. I
should like you to come.”

This was delivered at 8 p.m., and it is needless to say that she started
by the night train. A fortnight of anxious nursing followed; but her
affairs were not forgotten:

                                        “Local Government Board,
                                             Whitehall. Feb. 24. 74.

  DEAR MASSON,

        I have heard, of course, also from Miss Jex-Blake. I won’t say
  ‘No’ at any rate at present.

  First I will see Lowe and ascertain his mind; and then I should like
  to see if someone more acceptable to Dizzy cannot be found. I think
  one must look around one first in the new Parliament, before deciding.

  Is not the Bill you propose simply one enabling Universities to grant
  Degrees to women; or what else do you propose?

  Whether it is good or bad I should tell you that the wirepulling and
  newspaper doctors _hate me_.

                                           Yours ever,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

                                                     “Feb. 25th. 74.

  DEAR MASSON,

        I have seen Lowe about your proposed Bill.

  He is ‘heartily’ for it, but thinks that he and I had better support
  and not originate. Just now, he says, whatever we do will probably be
  considered wrong, as the tide is against us, and for this reason none
  of these Bills should be _introduced_ by any of us ex-cabinet
  ministers. Moreover if any of them are to pass they must be made as
  little unacceptable as possible to Dizzy & Co., which means that they
  had better be proposed and seconded by men on either side of the
  House—one on one side and one on the other—but not by us.

  I must say that the more I think of it the more I find this reasoning
  sound. And I am prepared to _advise_ therefore that you should not ask
  either Lowe or me.

  As to myself there is another special reason, to which I have already
  referred, why it might be more prudent not to choose me, viz. that
  ‘the doctors’ hate me; and tho’ I can’t see exactly how that fact
  might operate, it might at least be admitted that it might operate
  unfavourably, and that therefore it would be safer to look elsewhere.

  I won’t write to Miss Jex-Blake yet, but will wait to hear from you
  what you think.

  Of course I would willingly support and help.

                                            Yours ever,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

                                         “10, Regent Terrace, Edinr.
                                                Feb. 26, 1874.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have had two letters from Mr. Stansfeld, which I enclose. The
  second, you will see, is less favourable than the first, though not
  absolutely conclusive. In reply I have expressed my belief that the
  second objection—that about his relation to the ‘doctors’—can matter
  little, inasmuch as we can’t expect anyone who takes up the cause to
  be a darling of the doctors or to remain one[122]; but on the other
  objection I have not felt able to say much against the experienced
  instinct of Mr. Lowe and himself. On the one side there may be a good
  deal in their feeling that for an ex-minister of the Gladstone Cabinet
  to move the Bill may move Disraeli to criticism, if not to opposition;
  on the other it seems essential that the lead should be taken by an
  eminent and faithful man. You will weigh the whole matter in London
  and consult.

  I daresay it will be best not to publish the Memorial to Disraeli till
  the receipt of it is acknowledged. I have all the renewed
  signatures[123] now except the Edinburgh ones; and these, I hope, will
  be completed today or tomorrow.

                                         Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

Footnote 122:

  We must never forget that a minority of doctors had been helpful all
  along. Years before this a petition to Parliament in favour of the
  women had been signed by nearly two hundred.

Footnote 123:

  The Memorial had been originally addressed to Gladstone.

                                              “Stoke Lodge,
                                                  Hyde Park Gate, W.
                                                      Feb. 28. 74.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I could see you either on Monday or Tuesday afternoon. But
  where? For the Local Government Board knows me no more.

  I shall be working at the Athenaeum on Monday afternoon, and could
  therefore easily call on you anywhere in town.

  I could see you _here_ on the Tuesday and could make any time
  convenient, but the morning would be most so.

  Pray let me know.

  I enclose Mr. Lowe’s and Mr. Russell Gurney’s notes. You have heard
  from Masson, I presume. I wrote after seeing Lowe. But I will postpone
  telling you of our interview till we meet.

                                         Yours truly,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

A sharp little illness made it difficult for Mr. Stansfeld to pursue the
matter for a week or two, but finally we get the following:

                                         “15 Gt. Stanhope Street, W.
                                                    March 21.

  DEAR STANSFELD,

        I am quite ready to take up the case of the women students if a
  good Bill can be framed, and I shall have to see you on Monday at the
  House.

                                 Ever yours,
                                                  W. COWPER TEMPLE.”

  [Telegram] “March 23rd. Cowper Temple, Great Stanhope Street to Miss
  Jex-Blake, 15 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh.

  Can you tell me a lawyer who knows the subject and will frame the Bill
  or advise about it.”

This was apparently followed by a letter, for, at the earliest possible
moment on March 24th, S. J.-B. sent down a note by hand to her
solicitor:

  “DEAR MR. MILLAR,

        An eminent M.P. has undertaken to bring in an Enabling Bill to
  _enable_ Universities to educate and graduate women on the same terms
  as men, and I have just got a letter asking me to send up a draft of
  such Bill. As you are the best authority on such matters I should like
  to see you at once about it, and should be extremely glad if you could
  sketch out a draft beforehand, as time is of the greatest moment.

  Could I see you if I called between 12.30 and 1 p.m.?

                                            Yrs. truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

The Draft Bill seems to have been posted that afternoon, and the
following day another telegram arrived:

  “March 25th. Rt. Hon. Stansfeld, London, to Miss Jex-Blake, 15
  Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh.

  I have seen Mr. Cowper Temple and we advise you to come and see him.”

So of course S. J.-B. travelled up to London next day.

  [Diary] “March 26th. Summoned up to London about Cowper Temple’s Bill.
  He very kind, plenty of good will.... Stansfeld admirable. Gurney do.,
  only from health inactive. Lowe, Gallio-like.”

A day or two later S. J.-B. dined with the Cowper Temples and details
were threshed out.

  “I am so glad,” writes Miss M‘Laren, “that you have succeeded so well,
  and find Mr. Cowper Temple such a nice man and energetic besides,—and
  trust all may go well. I am not afraid of opposition at all, but what
  I do fear is that at this late season it may not get through.”

                                                      “Broadlands.
                                                           April 15.

  To Miss Jex-Blake:

        ... Mr. Ewing consented when I explained the Bill to him, and
  his name with that of Mr. Gurney and Dr. Cameron are on the back of
  the Bill. I am not very sanguine of success if a serious opposition
  should be manifested, but I have hopes that the moderation of the
  measure may have the effect of not calling forth the latent antagonism
  that exists against the cause.

  But whether the Bill passes or not, it must advance the cause, for at
  least we shall have a good debate on the subject.

  I talked to Sir W. Maxwell when I first thought of undertaking a Bill
  and I found that he took the view that in his representative position
  as Rector of Edinburgh University he ought not to take a part in a
  question in which there is so much difference of opinion and warmth of
  feeling. I have fixed Friday 24th for the second reading, but am not
  at all sure that it can come on that evening as there will be many
  questions before it.

  I return to London tomorrow.

                                    Yours—[illegibly],
                                                       W. C. TEMPLE.

  The names on the back of the Bill are

                           Mr. Cowper Temple,
                           Mr. Russell Gurney,
                           Mr. Orr Ewing,
                           Dr. Cameron.”

There was much discussion as to the desirability of keeping quiet about
the Bill, and allowing it to slip through, if possible, without arousing
all the energies of the opposition.

                                           “10 Regent Terrace,
                                                 Edinburgh.
                                                      April 1, 1874.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Best thanks for your letter. From what it says and from what I
  had heard before to the same effect from Miss M‘Laren, I have not the
  least doubt of the practical wisdom of the limitation of the Bill to
  the Scottish Universities. The difficulty of taking such differently-
  constituted Universities along in the Bill has struck me so far; but I
  had not thought of the special difficulty that might arise from
  jealousy of the divided powers of the University of London. But, while
  _our_ Bill goes on alone, there is no reason why the other
  universities should not be _moving_, each for itself, and all such
  movement would help ours.

  I am not so sure of the policy of _silence_ about our Bill. Miss
  M‘Laren will have told you that Dr. Lyon Playfair has alarmed our
  people here by informing them of it, and asking their opinion. There
  is a Committee on watch with power to call a Senatus meeting when the
  Bill is perfectly known. Possibly, when they see it, they may feel
  inclined to do nothing, seeing that it only legitimises the power the
  University thought it possessed when it passed the regulations; but no
  one can tell. All that Dr. L. P. wanted was advice for himself; and
  nothing, even of that kind, can be done collectively, except by
  Senatus—as the Committee is for observation only. Still the matter is
  public; and _individuals_ may be at work. Also the fact and drift of
  the Bill have been mentioned in the newspapers, e.g. by the London
  correspondent of the Glasgow _Mail_. If, in these circumstances, you
  are of opinion that the memorial to Mr. Disraeli may be published,
  please return my copy with the signatures; and I will send it to our
  _three_ papers here—where perhaps it ought to appear first. But you
  will, of course, act with the advice of Mr. Cowper Temple and others;
  and I won’t publish till you give the word. Anyhow it might be best to
  return the memorial to me. A telegraph from you would then tell me to
  publish any day—if not immediately.

                                      Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

                                                    “April 15, 1874.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        After reading today the _Scotsman’s_ report of the introduction
  of the Bill, and observing how quietly and cautiously it seems to be
  framed (‘to remove doubts as to the powers’ etc.)[124] I have thought
  it better not at once to publish the memorial. If there is any
  possibility that the Bill will be let through without opposition, our
  memorial, as more strongly expressed, might interfere with this. At
  all events I have thought it most prudent not to be in a hurry, but to
  wait a day or two till we see how Mr. C. T.’s Bill is received among
  the probable enemies. Very likely they will move against it somehow,—
  secretly if not publicly; and, if we find this, then our memorial
  ought to come out as a contribution to the argument. You will perhaps
  hear how Dr. Lyon Playfair and Mr. Gordon act in London: I will
  observe here. Perhaps I am prudent in excess; but, once the memorial
  is out, it is past recall.

                                   Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

Footnote 124:

  “A Bill to Remove Doubts as to the Powers of the Universities of
  Scotland to admit Women as Students, and to grant Degrees to Women.”

                                          “83 Belgrave Road, S.W.
                                                   16th April, 1874.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        The bill has been introduced by Mr. Cowper Temple, and my name
  is one of those on its back. If it could be smuggled through it would
  of course save a great deal of time and trouble, but I am afraid it is
  of no use to think of that. The moment it is published the bill will
  be telegraphed to all the Scotch papers, and every professor in every
  university, and almost every medical man throughout Scotland, will
  perceive its drift. Moreover you must remember that the Lord Advocate
  is member for Glasgow and Aberdeen University, and will have to keep
  his constituents well posted up in everything affecting their
  interests. If I see anything concerning the measure in the Scotch
  papers, I shall forward it to you, and meanwhile remain

                                Yours very sincerely,
                                                    CHARLES CAMERON.

  Miss Jex-Blake.”

So the glove was thrown down, and, as Dr. Cameron had predicted, the
news of it was instantly flashed from Dan to Beersheba. In a very short
time 65 petitions in favour of the Bill were presented to Parliament,
three of these being from the Town Councils of Edinburgh, Aberdeen, and
Linlithgow. There was also one from the City of Edinburgh, and one from
16,000 women. The most important, perhaps, was from twenty-six
Professors of Scottish Universities, including eight (out of fourteen)
Professors of the University of St. Andrews,—among them the Rev.
Principal Tulloch,—and thirteen Professors of the University of
Edinburgh. If Glasgow was poorly represented in number, the women had
all the more reason to be proud of the weight of the two names,—John and
Edward Caird. There was also a petition from those Edinburgh lecturers
who had actually taught the women.

Against the Bill there were four petitions:

    1. From the University Court of Edinburgh.

    2. From the Senatus of Edinburgh University.

    3. From the Medical Faculty of the Senatus (probably identical with
        2).

    4. From the University of Glasgow.

The second reading of the Bill was fixed for April 24th, but at the
urgent request of Dr. Lyon Playfair, member for the University of
Edinburgh, it was postponed to a later date (“in order that his
University might have time to consider the subject”!) when the pressure
of business made it impossible to secure any day: or, as Miss M‘Laren
had predicted, it failed to “get through.” And so the whole question was
practically shelved for another year.

There was an interesting debate on the motion, however, on June 12th,
1874, when able speeches were made by Mr. Cowper Temple, Mr. Stansfeld
and others,—the two members for Edinburgh (Town and Gown) providing an
almost dramatic contrast.

Mr. M‘Laren (Town), hard-headed, shrewd man of business, bluntly
declared that “if it were a question to be decided by the intelligent
inhabitants of Edinburgh, nine-tenths would vote in its favour.... If
two or three of the professors would only take a voyage round the world,
the whole question would be satisfactorily settled before they returned.
(Laughter.) Where the male students paid three or four guineas for each
class, the ladies paid eight or ten guineas, so that money was no
obstacle. There was no difficulty, in fact, except want of will, and
that arose from medical prejudice,—at least that was the opinion of the
great majority of the people in Edinburgh.”

Dr. Lyon Playfair (Gown), scholar, courtier, man-of-the-world, had a
harder task. Even _Punch_ was moved to sympathy with him “as one in a
perplexity between his constituents and his convictions.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

In any case the whole question had entered on a new phase, there was
fresh enthusiasm for the cause, and, on the other hand, those who had
looked upon the idea of women doctors as an amusing absurdity, were
roused to perturbation and alarm.




                             CHAPTER XVIII
                THE LONDON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE FOR WOMEN


It is a terrible thing for a hasty, impulsive, faulty human being to be
placed as S. J.-B. was at this time, in a difficult position—on a
slippery ridge, as it were—in the eye of the whole world. It has been
said before that few people ventured to “lecture” her: she liked to hear
the truth, and, when her friends were prepared to risk all, she took
their faithful dealing magnanimously, often nobly: but somehow she made
adverse criticism very difficult. It was said of her that she would have
made an excellent advocate,—she had so keen an eye for the strong points
of her own position and the weak points of those of her adversaries; and
it is only fair to say that, in conversation with her, many people might
well be simply carried away. In a sort of _esprit d’escalier_—or
_jugement d’escalier_—they might see the other side of the question, and
sometimes they wrote a qualifying letter to say so; but we know how few
people are prepared in life to take that amount of trouble in a matter
that does not intimately concern themselves. It is so much easier to
sympathize with those who confide to us their troubles and difficulties,
and then to vent our _jugement d’escalier_ on the man we meet in the
street below. In the course of her life S. J.-B. got more than her share
of that kind of sympathy.

We have seen that, in the matter of her examination the year before, she
did not admit the justice of her rejection. She was supported in this
attitude by the opinion of three or four lecturers and examiners in the
subjects for which she had entered, who had read her papers and had
cordially pronounced them—in writing—to be up to or above the pass
standard. Hundreds of people had, of course, expressed to her their
belief that she had not been fairly treated, and their sympathy had
steadily intensified the impression in her own mind. She would have
accepted Huxley’s verdict loyally, if _all_ the papers handed in at that
examination could have been submitted to him. No one who reads one paper
only can possibly say—except by an exercise of faith in his fellow
creatures—whether worse papers have been accepted and better rejected,
or no. It would have been strange indeed if Huxley had not had that
amount of faith in his colleagues.

From the moment of Dr. (afterwards Sir Wyville) Thomson’s appointment to
the Chair of Biology, S. J.-B. had dreaded him as an examiner, on the
ground that he was altogether adverse to the women. “You will receive no
insolence from _him_,” Professor Tait had written to her in 1871, “but I
fear that is all I can say, though it _is something_.” And previously,
“although he is not in your favour, he is not a man to take any mean or
unfair advantage.”

She ought, of course, to have accepted this judgment once for all as
that of a just man, but from the time of her examination the conviction
that she had been unfairly treated never wavered, though the whole
matter was, she thought, a thing of the past forever.

In a great controversy, however, nothing may ever be safely assumed to
be a thing of the past. It seems to be buried forever, but it lies at
the mercy of any chance turn of the spade.

And this brings us back to the point where Dr. Lyon Playfair, “in a
perplexity between his constituents and his convictions”—those
constituents meaning to all intents and purposes the “two or three
Professors” for whom the Member for Edinburgh had recommended a voyage
round the world as a means of solving the whole difficulty—Dr. Lyon
Playfair had so availed himself of the machinery of Parliament as to
shelve the whole question indefinitely.

One quite realizes that by this time it was war to the knife on both
sides, and one refrains from unduly criticising either; but it is S. J.-
B. whose life we are considering, and there can be no doubt that for
her—overworked and overstrained as she was—the situation was very hard
to bear.

And now the discussion in Parliament, literally bringing the question
“into the range of practical politics,” had stirred up all the latent
objection to the idea of women doctors, and had brought every weapon
into play. One can dimly conjecture the number and variety of assaults
that must have been made on the leading newspapers, and it is small
wonder if some of them were sorely unsettled, so much so that “the
pulpit spake pure Canterbury in the morning and Geneva in the
afternoon.”

Even the _Times_ began to talk of “all the delicacies and best charms”
of woman’s nature, and took occasion to say in a leading article, “It is
a little amusing, indeed, that one of the Ladies who had rendered
herself most conspicuous, should after all have failed under the test of
examination.” The writer did not add—perhaps he had not been informed—
that three of the fellow-students of that conspicuous Lady had
successfully passed the examination in question in a previous year; but
the playful taunt—if taunt it was—was more than the generous spirit of
one of those successful candidates could stand. She wrote an impulsive
letter, mentioning S. J.-B. by name, and explaining that it was
“devotion to our cause which led to her failure,” that “she had borne
the brunt of the battle, and had spared her fellow-students all the
harass and worry of the struggle, and had thus enabled them to enjoy the
leisure requisite for passing their examinations.”

Of course the writer should have consulted S. J.-B. before sending this
letter to the _Times_, but apparently it never occurred to her that the
defence might not be acceptable to the one defended. In any case, the
letter came upon S. J.-B. like a thunderbolt, and she committed the
great and crowning mistake of her life,—she wrote a letter to the
_Times_, implying in effect that in the matter of the examination, she
did not believe she had been fairly treated.

It was quite a temperate letter from her point of view, but—as her
brother had said—she was throwing pebbles at a fortress, and, what was
worse, throwing them under the gaze of the whole civilized world.

If Professor Crum Brown had done the Women’s Cause a service by denying
to Miss Pechey the name and privileges of Hope Scholar, S. J.-B. had now
repaid that service to him and his colleagues, full measure, pressed
down, shaken together and running over.

Under the mighty Ægis of the University of Edinburgh, the examiners
replied, and Professor Huxley himself entered the controversy in defence
of his friend, Dr. Wyville Thomson, who was away on the “Challenger”
Expedition at the time.

Miss Pechey was only restrained by prudent friends from publishing a
generous letter in which she expressed her conviction that, if Professor
Huxley had examined the Edinburgh students, 90 per cent. of them would
have failed, and she added a paragraph which shows at least how
differently a great institution may look when regarded from two
different points of view:

  “It is really amusing to those who know anything of the constitution
  of the University to find [the Examiners] gravely suggesting that [S.
  J.-B.] could have appealed to the Medical Faculty, the Senatus, and
  the University Court. The names have an imposing sound, but, when one
  comes to consider, the Medical Faculty resolves itself into the
  medical examiners, the Senatus (at that time of the year, before the
  arts professors had returned for the winter) into the Medical Faculty,
  whilst the University Court is in reality the mouthpiece of one member
  who I fear would turn a deaf ear to any appeal from Miss Jex-Blake.”

Well, there it was! If the cause could have been killed, this mistake
might probably have killed it. If S. J.-B. could have been crushed, this
mistake would have crushed her. But the cause was intensely vital, and
S. J.-B. was tough.

One falls back once more on Newman’s brave and comforting words:

  “The very faults of an individual excite attention—he loses, but his
  cause (if good, and he powerful-minded) gains—this is the way of
  things, we promote truth by a self-sacrifice.”

S. J.-B. was just starting on her holiday when the correspondence took
place, and, although Miss Stevenson and Mrs. Thorne both wrote to tell
her of the “irreparable” damage it had done, most of her friends and
supporters were disposed to let her enjoy her holiday—if she could—in
peace.

So, in the silence and repose of a sojourn in Perthshire, she laid her
future plans.

                  *       *       *       *       *

As early as December 6th, 1873, Dr. Anstie had written to her:

  “DEAR MADAM,

        I am afraid I do not see my way to any practical plan at
  present.

  “At Westminster it is quite possible that my colleagues would consent
  to _separate_ classes. But the fatal objection is want of space; and I
  could not, I feel sure, persuade them to try the experiment of mixed
  classes.

  I fear there is no way, except by the ladies raising money enough to
  found a school for themselves. In _that_ case I, and I think others,
  would be willing to go out of our way to afford them _teaching_. But
  the difficulties about clinical teaching seem very great.

  I will talk the matter over with my colleague, Mr. Cowell, and write
  to you again....”

                                                 “16 Wimpole Street,
                                                     Dec. 12th.

  DEAR MADAM,

        Three or four days of complete prostration with influenza have
  prevented me from finding time to talk with Mr. Cowell.

  But as regards the Westminster Hospital School I think it very
  unlikely that any proposition would be entertained with regard to
  surrendering our position as teachers of _male_ students....

  I think (so far as I can at present judge) that your best course would
  be to take some premises in London, and build a thoroughly good
  school, fit for first-class teaching of the theoretical courses. I
  believe if that were done you would get teachers. And with that solid
  evidence of sincerity and energy in your work I believe the hospitals,
  or some of them, would give way and grant you hospital practice.

  But this is only my first crude idea. Believe me,

                               Yours very faithfully,
                                                FRANCIS ED. ANSTIE.”

It is impossible to over-estimate the whole-heartedness with which Dr.
Anstie took up the cause. There are numerous letters in which he records
the various advances and checks which he experienced in the course of
his advocacy. For a time he had hopes of inducing his own School to
admit women, but the matter got wind, and an adverse medical paper
raised all that latent opposition with which the pioneers were becoming
so familiar. From this point of view the discussion in Parliament did,
for the moment, as much harm as good, and finally we find Dr. Anstie
writing:

                                                 “16 Wimpole Street,
                                                      July 2.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        For the moment we are thoroughly defeated, and it may be well to
  rest on our oars for a little time. You will probably have heard of
  the rejection by the Senate of U. L. of the proposition about degrees,
  and I wrote to tell you that I also found it was impossible to induce
  my colleagues at Westminster to open a female department of the
  School.

  I think there is nothing for it now but to make up your minds to form
  a school for yourselves. Were that once done I do not think there
  would be any very great difficulty in obtaining clinical instruction
  and in becoming recognized by some of the corporations.

  I am sorry to have had no better luck as your champion. But there is
  no doubt just now for some reason or other, a strong current of
  adverse opinion. As I said before I think you and the other ladies
  should take counsel with your friends, and (without renewal of the
  discussion in public) should set to work upon the scheme of a school.

  I feel little doubt that, if you could show the positive evidence of
  energy and resource afforded by the establishment of a separate school
  in London, you would get both sympathy and teaching help.

                              Believe me,
                                        Yours sincerely,
                                                      F. E. ANSTIE.”

Mr. Norton, too, of St. Mary’s Hospital, assured S. J.-B. that “a
thoroughly good school might be organised, apart from the existing
schools, but with friendly lecturers gathered from any or all of them.”
This suggestion obviated the very real difficulty of getting fresh
lecturers “recognised.”

Mrs. Anderson still thought the time was not ripe: Mrs. Thorne was in
Paris[125]: the other students were scattered far and wide for the
holidays. From every point of view it seemed imperative that the winter
session should be secured: so, with the help of the two men mentioned
above and of Dr. King Chambers, S. J.-B. simply did the work herself.

Footnote 125:

  Mrs. Thorne on her return tried to dissuade S. J.-B. from making the
  attempt; but, on finding how much had been done, she gladly coöperated
  in raising funds.

The record is brief enough,—there has been no entry in the diary since
June 23rd: no reference to the _Times_ controversy at all:

  “August 11th. Tuesday. To London, in one day [from Perthshire]. To
  Hampstead. Rested one day.

  August 13th. Thursday. To Anstie and Norton. Both encouraging and
  helpful.”

Follows another of those sheaves of blank pages which always indicate
intense activity or preoccupation; and her book, _Medical Women_, just
touches on “an almost incredible amount of search, enquiry and
disappointment”; there are various stray lists of lecturers, possible,
probable and certain; and then we proceed without farther entry to:

  “Sept. 15th. Actually signed lease and got possession of 30
  Henrietta[126] Street. Rigged up some kind of beds and slept there
  that night,—Alice coming from Wales to help me.”

Footnote 126:

  The name was afterwards changed to Handel Street, and then to Hunter
  Street.

Here there is a footnote:

  “Miss Irby also came for a night one day this month,—grand, quiet,
  strong.”

Another blank page or two, and then:

  “Oct. 9th. Friday. Entered into 32 Bernard Street,[127] Mother and
  all. (She nearly extinguished by mattress!)

  Oct. 12th. Monday. Opening of London School of Medicine for Women.”

Footnote 127:

  The house S. J.-B. had taken as her private residence.

There is no farther entry till 1875. We owe to a stranger, however, the
following pleasant description of the School as it was then:

  “For the early existence of an institution like this School of
  Medicine no more appropriate home could in all probability be found
  within the wide area of London than the curious old house in Henrietta
  Street. In a central position, within easy reach of museums and
  libraries, but retired from the bustle of noisy thoroughfares, a range
  of spacious rooms stretches a long front towards the green sward of an
  old-fashioned garden. Apartments admirably adapted for the purpose of
  lecture halls ‘give,’ as the Americans say, from underneath a broad
  verandah on this pleasant outlook. Cosy in winter, cool in summer, and
  undisturbed by the sounds of external life always, these rooms should
  be highly favourable to philosophic contemplation. In the upper story—
  there is only one above the ground-floor—are several smaller
  apartments suitable for museums and reading-rooms.”—_Daily News_,
  March 13, 1877.

How deep was the impression made upon Miss Irby by that brief visit we
gather from a letter written twenty years later (on July 5th, 1894):

  “I was on the point of writing to you after the prize-giving at the
  London School of Medicine for Women. A visit to those premises always
  recalls to me those few days with you when you stood there alone in
  almost bare walls, establishing the fort. You would wish nothing
  better than that the School should go on as it is going on, friends
  and foes being drawn into it. But I always _burn_ with the
  recollection of your first days there.”




                              CHAPTER XIX
                    THE RUSSELL GURNEY ENABLING ACT


It was at this stage that Mrs. Anderson’s help was so invaluable to the
great venture. She had an assured position—social and professional—in
the metropolis; and her name carried the weight that belongs to a sane
and shrewd and able personality. It is impossible to over-estimate the
good she had done to “the Cause” by simply showing that a woman _can be
a reliable and successful practitioner_. She had founded a small
hospital for women; but she still thought that the time for the creation
of a good medical school for women had not come,—that it would have been
better to wait till public opinion was more distinctly in favour of
women doctors: and she would have fostered the growth of public opinion
by encouraging women to obtain foreign degrees, and to practise in
England as unregistered physicians and surgeons.

She was strengthened in this position by the fact that S. J.-B. was not
the Founder she would have chosen: she judged the Edinburgh campaign by
its net result as regarded the immediate object at which it had aimed,
and, so far as Edinburgh University was concerned, that net result was
failure. There were those, moreover, who assured her, not without a
measure of truth, that Miss Jex-Blake’s impulsiveness (“want of
judgment,” “want of temper,” she told S. J.-B.) had done great harm in
Edinburgh. She and her informants alike failed, perhaps, at the moment
to realize how that same impulsiveness (mistakes and all) had formed the
picturesque element that made the popular appeal,—how that same
impulsiveness had roused and had borne the brunt of the latent
opposition which must have manifested itself sooner or later under the
wisest management.

There is abundant contemporary evidence to this effect. Dr. Mary Putnam
Jacobi wrote from America:

  “You have fortunately been able to interest a much larger and better
  class of people than have ever bestirred themselves in the matter
  here. The list of governors of your School is quite imposing. You at
  least have had the advantage attaching to a conspicuous battle with
  real and dignified forces engaged on each side; whereas here,—this
  question, as so many others, has rather dribbled into the sand.”

Miss Pechey, too, after delivering a lecture in Yorkshire a year later,
wrote:

  “I couldn’t conclude without saying that all we had done towards
  opening up the medical profession to women was due mainly to Miss Jex-
  Blake, who had got all the abuse because she had done all the work,—in
  fact all along she had done the work of three women or (with a grin at
  the phalanx of men behind)—of ten men! This brought down the house.”

“Mrs. Garrett Anderson is a fine instance of an individual success,”
said one of the physicians who assisted the movement in those early
days; “but Miss Jex-Blake fights the battle, not for herself, but for
all.”

Of course an individual success cannot but assist a movement of the kind
quite as surely as any other contribution.

One thing the two pioneers had in common,—a fine honesty and
truthfulness: much plain speaking passed between them: and, if it had
been possible for two such different natures to see things eye to eye,
no want of candour or breadth of view on either side would have
prevented it. Here is a sample of their correspondence:

                                            “Hampstead.
                                                  21st August, 1874.

  DEAR MRS. ANDERSON,

        If I kept a record of all the people who bring me cock and bull
  stories about you, and assure me that you are “greatly injuring the
  cause,” I might fill as many pages with quotations as you have
  patience to read, but, beyond defending you on a good many occasions,
  I have never thought it needful to take much notice of such incidents,
  still less to retail them to you.

  Nor do I much care to know whether or no certain anonymous individuals
  have confided to you that they lay at my door what you call “the
  failure at Edinburgh,”—inasmuch as the only people really competent to
  judge of that point are my fellow-workers and fellow-students, such as
  Professor Masson, Professor Bennett, Miss Stevenson, Mrs. Thorne, Miss
  Pechey, Dr. Watson, and Dr. Balfour, and I do not fancy that it is
  from any of these that you have heard the comments in question.

  It can, as I say, serve no purpose whatever to go into this sort of
  gossip which is very rarely indeed founded on any knowledge of facts;
  but, quite apart from any such discussion, I am more than willing to
  say that if, in the opinion of a majority of those who are organizing
  this new school, my name appears likely to injure its chances of
  success, I will cheerfully stand aside, and let Mrs. Thorne and Miss
  Pechey carry out the almost completed plans.

  So much for your second objection [to joining the Council of the
  School] which I have taken first, because I feel that the other is for
  your own consideration and Dr. Anstie’s, and that it is needless for
  me to say anything on the point.

  In conclusion let me say that I never said it ‘did not signify’
  whether you joined the Council (though I _did_ say that I believed the
  School was already tolerably secure of ultimate success.) I think it
  of very great importance, both for your credit and ours, that there
  should, as you say, be no appearance of split in the camp, and I
  should greatly prefer that your name should appear on the Council with
  Dr. Blackwell’s and those of the medical men who are helping us.

                              Believe me,
                                      Yours truly,
                                                  SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.”

So Mrs. Anderson joined the Council, taking no part in the daily life
and work of the School, but bringing to the new venture excellent
qualities in which S. J.-B. was lacking, among them the valuable gift
for bearing in mind who are the people worth conciliating,—the people
with whom one simply must not quarrel.

S. J.-B., on the other hand, brought an amount of practical capacity and
experience which the reader can estimate for himself. We have seen what
she expected—and got—from her solicitor in the matter of the draft of a
Parliamentary Bill: it is not to be supposed that she was less
successful with printers, nor with plumbers, carpenters and others. She
knew exactly how quickly a proof might be expected in an emergency, and
she knew what the printing ought to cost. If there was anything about
the printed page that struck the eye as “odd,” she had her finger on the
technical defect in a moment, and saw that it was put right. She loved
drawing up specifications for tanks, etc., and making her drawing to
scale: carpentry was an unfailing joy,—nuts, bolts, staples, screws were
as familiar to her as were bourgeois, pica, leads, and other mysteries
of the printer’s craft. “I like working for the Doctor,” an Edinburgh
joiner said in later years, “she knows what she wants, and she knows
when it is well done”; but of course it was only a competent and
conscientious workman who could rise to this view of the case.
Fortunately life provides a good many of these: when S. J.-B. met one,
she valued him as he deserved.

Recalling the early days of the School at a meeting of the Governing
Body more than twenty years later, Mr. Norton said:

  “Miss Jex-Blake had come to him in 1874 after leaving Edinburgh, and
  he had then expressed the opinion that if funds were raised and a
  school established of which all the teachers were recognized by the
  Examining Boards,—the Apothecaries’ Society would be obliged to admit
  its students to examination. By the middle of October Miss Jex-Blake
  had succeeded in obtaining £1300 and in renting 30 Handel Street for
  the purposes of a School of Medicine for Women. It was her great
  energy which succeeded in so promptly carrying out the work of
  starting the School.”

  “Mrs. Anderson said she recollected that in those early days she had
  been timid and had considered the time had not yet arrived for
  establishing a separate School of Medicine for Women. To organize a
  School on the slender sum of money raised by Miss Jex-Blake required
  great optimism....”

So it did. It required much more than optimism. It required a unique
capacity for directing and supervising every atom of work done, a unique
capacity for getting a full and fair penny’s worth out of every penny, a
unique capacity for finding workers who would put their shoulder to the
wheel, and do things for love. Chief of these workers always was
herself.

After the first Prize-giving Miss M‘Laren writes:

  “L[ouisa] S[tevenson] and I have just been saying that no one but you
  could have done all that work on Wednesday. But indeed there is almost
  nothing that you don’t do better than everyone else.”

Few even of S. J.-B.’s opponents would have denied that this was true.
In everything connected with Board and Business meetings she was an
expert. To say one had been trained under her was for many years an
invaluable testimonial among those who knew. Her enthusiasm was combined
with a clear-sighted grasp of every detail of the situation. Repeatedly
one finds Cabinet Ministers and other busy people saying,—“I won’t look
at the documents till you come and give me the thread,” “I can’t begin
to write the paper till you come and talk me into it,” or words to that
effect.

Valuable qualities these: but not necessarily the qualities that create
the pleasantest possible atmosphere for those who have been in the habit
of slipping through life easily. There must have been a good many then
as later who would have been glad on occasion to deal with someone a
little less business-like.

In any case the thing was launched, Mr. Norton accepted the office of
Dean[128]; there was a staff of able lecturers; and twenty-three
students joined during the first year. Mrs. Anderson and others brought
much needed financial help; Lord Shaftesbury distributed the prizes at
the end of the first winter session; and Lord Aberdare presided at the
first meeting of the Governing Body. So far all went well.

Footnote 128:

  To the great loss of the medical women—as to many besides—Dr. Anstie
  died suddenly on September 12th.

Many were the congratulations from Edinburgh and St. Andrews, mingled
naturally with regrets that the little social centre at 15 Buccleuch
Place seemed permanently broken up. Professor Lewis Campbell and
Principal Tulloch were sure the situation as regarded their University
had been greatly simplified by the creation of a good School; and Dr. G.
W. Balfour wrote:

  “I only regret that you will be so far beyond my reach that it will be
  impossible for me to coöperate actively in your future education,—
  though I shall always be very glad to do anything I can for you.”

This was one of the rare blank cheques on futurity that are destined to
be redeemed to the last farthing.

Professor Masson, too, was keen as ever.

                                          “10 Regent Terrace, Edinr.
                                                Oct. 23, 1874.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I had purposed when in London to give myself the pleasure of a
  visit to the new premises, and to hear from yourself all about the
  school and its prospects; but I was up on the business of some
  researches, and had to spend my days, almost to the last, at the
  British Museum or Record Office. One day I had a glimpse of you in a
  cab passing the British Museum gate, but too fast and too far off to
  be stopped. Mrs. Masson who is to be in London for a few days more
  will certainly make her way to Henrietta Street.

  I was very glad indeed to hear of so much success in organizing the
  new School, and glad also to hear several medical men I met in London
  speak of it not only approvingly on their own account, but also with a
  kind of conviction that it would settle matters. Are there not several
  rocks ahead however? And what about the Apothecaries and their
  disposition? May they not be acted upon by those opponents in the
  profession whose opposition is now likely to take the form of
  permitting women to qualify themselves under a different title to that
  given to men. The conservatives of the University of London Senate
  will probably promote this current of opinion.

  With best regards to all Edinburgh friends with you,

                             Believe me,
                                       Yours very truly,
                                                      DAVID MASSON.”

Dr. Masson had put his finger precisely on the difficulty. It was still
necessary to secure two indispensable conditions of success,—1.
Qualifying Hospital Instruction, and 2. Recognition by some Examining
Board. It is clear that even Mr. Norton had no idea when he first
espoused the cause how great this double difficulty would prove.
Application was made to every one of the nineteen Examining Boards, and
to every one application was made in vain. The Hospitals proved equally
obdurate. “Why should _this_ University be the _corpus vile_?” Dr. Lyon
Playfair had asked in Parliament the year before: and this very human
and comprehensible cry was doubtless echoed by every Examining Body in
the land.

S. J.-B. was determined not to let the public forget the question, and
in March 1875 she had an article in the _Fortnightly_, which Mr. Morley
(now Lord Morley) had accepted very cordially.

“It will give me the most entire satisfaction,” he wrote, “to join the
Governing Body of the New School of Medicine for Women, and I shall not
grudge whatever time may be necessary for taking part in its
proceedings. I thank you for your invitation.”

Once more the hopes of the women centred in Parliament. On March 3rd,
1875, Mr. Cowper Temple again brought forward his Enabling Bill, and a
long debate ensued, but the Bill was lost by 196 votes to 153. On March
25th he returned to the charge with a Bill to permit the registration of
the degrees of the Universities of France, Berlin, Leipzig, Berne and
Zurich, where such degrees were held by women. This was simply an
extension of a concession in the Medical Act of 1858, by which any
persons in practice in England with foreign degrees _at that date_ were
allowed to register. It was found impossible, however, to obtain the
support of Government to this measure, and no day could be secured for a
second reading, so the matter was again deferred.

It was not to be expected that the students would go on indefinitely
taking theoretical classes that led to nothing, and the future was
beginning to look dark when at last a step forward was made.

Mr. Stansfeld, Mr. Cowper Temple, and Mr. Russell Gurney were all the
kind of friends with whom one would go tiger-hunting, and no one of the
three showed any intention of backing out. On the 16th of June, in
answer to a question of Mr. Stansfeld’s, Lord Sandon admitted in the
name of the Government that the subject of the medical education of
women, only very lately submitted to Government, demanded their
consideration; and he undertook that it should be carefully considered
by the Government during the recess, so that they should be enabled to
express definite views with regard to legislation upon it in the next
session.

In the meantime Mr. Simon, in the name of the President of the Privy
Council, had addressed a letter to the President of the General Medical
Council requesting the observations of that Council on Mr. Cowper
Temple’s Bill, and indeed on the whole subject of the admission of women
to the medical profession.

The General Medical Council took up the question at last in all
seriousness, and the discussion lasted three days, during which many
remarkable things were said on both sides. Finally a report was adopted
and presented to the Privy Council to the effect that,

  “The Medical Council are of opinion that the study and practice of
  Medicine and Surgery, instead of affording a field of exertion well
  fitted for women, do on the contrary, present special difficulties
  which cannot be safely disregarded; but the Council are not prepared
  to say that women ought to be excluded from the profession.”

In the autumn of 1875 a fresh hope was raised, owing to a really
brilliant suggestion of Mr. Simon’s. He bethought himself that those
doctors who wished the women to have a different qualification from that
of men might be willing to allow them to enter for the Licence in
Midwifery of the College of Surgeons. Now this Midwifery Licence,
strangely enough, was a regular qualification, involving the same
medical curriculum as the M.R.C.S., and entitling those who held it to
put their names on the Medical Register, and to practise legally with
full rights as doctors. There was no reason why those women who had a
complete set of certificates from Edinburgh should not go in for it at
once, and forthwith become qualified general practitioners. It was not a
very dignified way of entering the profession, but it did seem to be a
way.

  “Thursday, Nov. 11th. Today saw Simon again. He thinks they would
  admit us for Midwifery Licence with present certificates,—not for
  M.R.C.S.—though expressly same [certificates] required in Regulations.
  Better to get on the Register _anyhow_ it seems to me?

  Only, could it choke off anything better? Hardly. If told that was
  open and refused, half our case gone. Besides any _existing_ Exam.
  better than a special one.

  Shall ask K[ing] Ch[ambers] tomorrow.

  Nov. 12th. Homme propose! K[ing] Ch[ambers] out of town....

  To see Sir J. Paget tomorrow.

  Bertie[129] been here today. Quite agrees, get anything you can,—ask
  for more by and bye.

  In fact one’s position would be far stronger after one’s certificates
  had been accepted for the one,—when identical are required for the
  other. Ah, well! Qui vivra verra—many things!...

  Saturday, Nov. 13th. Sir J. Paget this morning,—with Dr. A. He very
  kind and courteous, infinitely more of a gentleman than most.

  He decidedly of opinion that we could not get admitted to the
  M.R.C.S., but probably might to the L.M. He at least evidently thought
  we ought, and thought most of the Council would think so too. They
  meet apparently on Dec. 14th, and he advises us to send in application
  before that, and then, if granted, we can be examined by end of
  December.

  Fancy an Exam. in Midwifery _only_ putting one on the Register!...

  Tuesday, 16th. Saw Sir James Paget again at his request. He thinks we
  had better not apply before the meeting, but give application to
  Critchett to present, if desirable at the time....

  Wednesday 17th. Saw Critchett. Most friendly and wholehearted—willing
  to raise the question of M.R.C.S. if we liked, but I advised one step
  first, then leverage for next....

  Chambers not quite satisfied about L.M. but thinks it on the whole
  best for the cause (‘perhaps not for yourselves,’) to take it if we
  can.”

Footnote 129:

  Miss Bertha Cordery, now Mrs. S. R. Gardiner.

So those three brave women, Mrs. Thorne, Miss Pechey and S. J.-B.
proceeded to rub up their Midwifery, and meanwhile the authorities of
the College took the opinion of counsel as to their legal power to grant
or refuse the application. If no one else prospered by that long and
wearing struggle, certainly the lawyers did! On this occasion they
earned their salt by declaring “that the College had power to admit
women under its supplemental charter, and could be compelled by legal
process so to examine and grant certificates, ... that the Medical Act
clearly considered a holder of such certificates a licentiate in
midwifery, and as such entitled to register.”

  “Friday, 21st. Jan. My 36th birthday. Just half my life since I began
  independently. So curious to look back on cogitations of 18th
  birthday! But even then I had a presentiment of ‘sunshine and storm.’

  It seems as if this year was really to gain (tho’ in rather mesquin
  shape) what I have been fighting for in England for 7 years—
  Registration.

  College of Surgeons on 7th Jan. decided on advice of their counsel,
  Mr. Beaver, that they could not exclude women from the licence in
  Midwifery,—so we three seniors have sent in our certificates, etc.—
  given to Critchett on application on Dec. 4th,—presented by him on
  Jan. 7th.”

On March 17th, the women were told that their certificates had been
accepted, but, on the public announcement of this fact, the whole board
of examiners resigned. In relating the circumstances a year later, Mr.
Stansfeld wrote that “since then there had been no examiners and no
examination.”

  “Perhaps after all it is as well,” wrote Miss Pechey from Birmingham,
  where she now held a post at the Women’s Hospital under Mr. Lawson
  Tait,—“perhaps after all it is as well, as it gives us a stronger case
  for Parliament, and that licence would have been a sorry thing to
  practise upon....”

After suggesting a great scheme of a new “National University,” she
concludes,—

  “I suppose you can’t think of any way in which I could earn some
  money? I am beginning to wonder what I shall do when I leave here: I
  can’t begin to practise till I have had more midwifery.

                  *       *       *       *       *

  “I have only one other resource to suggest now this College of
  Surgeons has failed, viz., that I should go over to Ireland, take that
  Licence in Midwifery and then try to force the Registrar to register
  it,—if he would not do so at once, by legal measures. _Qu’en pensez-
  vous?_

                                                   Yours aff.
                                                              E. P.”

This is simply quoted to show the state—not indeed of despair, but of
desperation, which these gallant women had reached. One can sympathize
with this _cri du coeur_ from S. J.-B.’s diary:

  “Here comes Miss Irby’s note this morning,—wanting a hospital for the
  wounded at Serajevo.... Oh, dear, how I should love to go! It would
  probably be just the making of me as a surgeon,—and I have such a sort
  of wild feeling of wanting to ‘break out,’—of having been sair hadden
  doun by many bubbly jocks,—by the constant fighting, by Mother’s
  frequent illnesses, etc., etc. I feel as if it would be an intense
  relief to break right away into half savage parts and do hard rough
  work—and breathe!

  And then how nice it would be with Miss Irby.... I want to get away
  from mental strain and excitement,—to bodily hard work.

  And what magnificent practice it would be!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

  “U. D. P. against Serbian idea. Thinks my Mother would die in my
  absence and I never forgive myself.

  Also I should hurt ‘the cause’ by doctoring men.

  I doubt both propositions, but can’t disprove either.

  My brain is in a sort of dull ‘waiting’ condition,—‘quo Deus vocat.’
  Well, isn’t that best? Yes, if _thoroughly_ honest.

  I suppose the constant worry and constant thwarting have made me
  almost wild to break away for a bit. I feel somehow as if my mind were
  all strained, and this better than anything would give it back its
  tone.”

Miss Irby’s idea came to nothing for lack of funds, but in any case, of
course, S. J.-B. could not have gone. It was she who held in her hands
all the parliamentary threads, and she was looking anxiously for some
practical outcome from Lord Sandon’s promise of the year before. On
January 14th, however, Mr. Cowper Temple wrote:

  “DEAR MISS BLAKE,

        The Government are not prepared to tell me whether they will
  introduce any Bill next session on the subject of the medical
  registration of women, and therefore it will be necessary for me to
  bring in my Bill again at the commencement of the session....”

S. J.-B. thought it worth while, however, to remind the Government
tactfully of their promise, and she had learned by bitter experience to
keep every possible iron in the fire. So a deputation from the London
School of Medicine for Women, headed by Lord Aberdare, and including
herself and Mrs. Anderson, waited on the Duke of Richmond and Gordon,
Lord President of the Privy Council. The mission was ably voiced by Lord
Aberdare, Mr. Stansfeld, and Mr. Forsyth, M.P., Q.C., whose name now
appeared on the back of Mr. Cowper Temple’s Bill; but, although
courteously received, the deputation elicited no farther encouragement.

In these circumstances, Mr. Cowper Temple again introduced his “Foreign
Degrees” Bill, but fortune did not favour him in the matter of the
ballot for dates, and, in the meantime, S. J.-B. writes in her diary:

  “Saturday, May 13th. Saw Russell Gurney [who was now Recorder of
  London]. Found Government had intimated to him that he should bring in
  Bill _enabling_ all nineteen bodies,—to be shown to General Medical
  Council on 24th.

  _If_ this passes!

  Might graduate at Edinburgh after all.”

On the 5th of July Mr. Cowper Temple’s Bill came on for second reading,
but was withdrawn after debate upon a statement from Lord Sandon that
the Government were prepared to support the Recorder’s Bill. Even then
anxiety was by no means at an end, for the Government were not prepared
to make the Bill their own and find a day for it, and any persistent
opposition would have been almost necessarily fatal to its passing at so
late a time. One can picture the surprise with which S. J.-B. received
the following letter:

                                               “8 Palace Gardens, W.
                                                  21 July, [1876].

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I saw Lord Shaftesbury yesterday and he intends to give notice
  on Monday to move the second reading on Tuesday.

  The third reading will probably follow in a day or two.

  All that we shall then have to wait for will be the Royal Assent.

                                Always sincerely yours,
                                                    RUSSELL GURNEY.”

On August 12th the Bill became law. Henceforth no University nor
Examining Board could be in any doubt at all as to its own powers. Those
mysterious depths were at least no longer “an uncharted sea.”

On August 7th Miss Pechey writes:

  “Has our Bill received the Royal Assent? If so, I suppose Mrs. Thorne
  and I might apply any time to Edinburgh, though I don’t suppose she
  would consent to say what I intend to. I mean simply to ask them
  whether now they have the power, they intend honourably to fulfil the
  contract they made with me in 1869. It does not matter to me when I
  send in the question, as we can’t be examined, I believe, till next
  April. Isn’t it so? But of course we had better not apply till the
  Arts Professors are back.

                                           Ever yours affect.
                                                              E. P.”

Edinburgh, however, did not prove encouraging even to its own
matriculated students, so Miss Pechey—accompanied by Miss Shove—went to
Ireland in September to see what could be effected there. She was very
cordially received, though many with whom she had to deal were quite
unaware of the existence of the all-important Baby Act; and one can
imagine the joy with which, after much labour, she wrote to report that
both the Queen’s University and the King’s and Queen’s College of
Physicians had consented to examine women, subject only to their
complying with the ordinary regulations. “Miss Pechey has done wonders,”
wrote Mrs. Thorne.

The University regulations required attendance at four courses of
lectures in one of the Queen’s Colleges (at Cork, Belfast and Galway),
and four professors at Galway agreed to deliver these; but, owing
mainly—as happened so often!—to the opposition of one influential man,
the Council of the College interposed and vetoed the arrangement.

Fortunately the Irish College made no difficulties, and to that body
belongs the credit of being the first to grant to women—and above all,
to _these_ women—the long-deferred privilege of Registration. “I cannot
realize,” wrote Mrs. Thorne to S. J.-B. a few weeks later, “that an
examining body is absolutely open to us.” “You have been the mainspring
of the seven years’ struggle, and to you we are all deeply indebted for
the result.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Before passing on, we must record one pleasant distraction which that
summer had afforded in the appearance of Mr. Charles Reade on the scene,
deeply interested in “the fight,” and very anxious to obtain materials
for his _Woman Hater_. There are numerous letters from him to S. J.-B.,
asking information about this happening and that: and he spent many
mornings at her house, studying the archives. The novel achieved no
small success by running its course in _Blackwood’s Magazine_, within
the very gates, so to speak, of the enemy’s citadel.




                               CHAPTER XX
                                AT LAST




While all this business was pending, Miss M‘Laren, rendered incredulous
by her long family experience of parliamentary life, that a Bill
introduced so late could really pass—had written glowing descriptions of
the advantages offered by Berne, and Miss Pechey had almost resolved to
go there for the M.D. As the regulations of the Irish College were
exacting in the matter of hospital work, she resolved to carry out this
intention in any case as a preliminary measure.

  “I shall be very glad,” she writes, “of another _good_ winter’s
  hospital. I hope you will join me in this, so that we may keep
  together. I think I should send in the Berne degree here [in Ireland]
  when I had got it.”

The two friends were most desirous that Mrs. Thorne should join them on
this expedition for old sake’s sake; but family claims made this
impossible.

Well, it was something to break away, even thus far, and be mere
students again. For the moment S. J.-B. and Miss Pechey may almost be
said to have been resting on their oars. Nothing more arduous was
required of them than preparation for professional examination!

It was on Wednesday, November 1st, that, accompanied by Miss Clark (now
Dr. Annie Clark), they entered Switzerland, a white world, as it
chanced, for snow had already fallen. The diary begins again almost from
the moment of arrival:

  “Excellent déjeuner [at Bernerhof] 12.30. Then I lay down. E. P. and
  A. C. went out exploring. Wonderful energy of youth!”

They all proceeded at once to interview professors (Professor Masson had
sent a delightful introduction), and forthwith began to attend lectures
and cliniques, and to complete the theses which had been begun in
England. S. J.-B. took as her subject Puerperal Fever, she having
unhappily experienced an outbreak of that disease at Boston. The thesis
was clear and exhaustive at the time, but of little permanent value, as
the infective nature of the fever was not yet recognized, and treatment
everywhere was mainly on a wrong scent.

She suffered terribly from neuralgia, the result of past and present
strain, and work proceeded with difficulty. On December 20th Miss Pechey
and Miss Clark went home for Christmas.

The diary has been brief and painful reading, but the writer revives
just in time:

  “Tuesday [Dec.] 26th. Nearly seven hours’ work. Splendidly well.
  Accepted for examination Jan. 10th.

  Thursday 28th. Slept splendidly. For first time for weeks without
  anodyne.

  Wednesday. N. Schultz called. Very nice. To walk with me before exam.
  next Wednesday. Rather made me nervous with her pity.

  Friday.... Letter from U. D. P., begging me not to hurry—‘if I fail it
  can’t be kept secret.’ Are they all in league to shake my nerves?

  Saturday [Jan.] 6th. E. P. still in London. Glorious day.

  Tuesday 9th. From 5 a.m. rather nervous—got better in day—and did 9
  hours’ work. Good head all through—thank God!

  10 p.m. How very happy or very wretched I shall be this time tomorrow!
  I really feel as if I ought to be able to pass as far as knowledge
  goes,—tho’ not brilliantly,—but I am in despair about Langhans, and in
  less degree about others.—Still they will surely manage not to pluck
  me for mere want of German! Yesterday I felt almost as if I should
  fail, tonight I hope I shan’t, but with trembling....

  Eh, dear, if I succeed, how I shall (half) laugh at past funk!—if I
  fail, I feel as if I need never laugh again. (And yet, played patience
  half an hour just now rather than be beat—‘ill to beat’ not a bad
  motto!) And, if I’m not beat,—fancy this being my last night without
  M.D.!

  Wed. 10th. Nothing from E. P. or A. C. Wonder if latter has come.

  Very curious my sort of duplex feeling, (_a_) If I could only feel
  sure of passing, I should pass,—i.e. not being nervous. (_b_) _If_ I
  felt sure—I should be sure to fail, (superstition!) A sort of unworthy
  Setebos feeling, I think.

  Undertake for me!

                  *       *       *       *       *

  And He has! Thank God! Every exam. fairly creditable, which is worth
  twice a scratch.

  Now to see how much better an M.D. sleeps than other people!”

                                                       “13th Jan.
                                                           Brighton.

  MY DARLING,

        Words cannot express my thankfulness at your success, and
  release from anxiety. I did not fear because I did not see why they
  should be unjust, but I am more than glad that it is settled.

  I ought to have scolded you some days ago for more grapes. I am very
  forgetful, and I really sleep so well that I do not require them.

  Well, dear, I am quite unsettled with the good news. Hoping to meet so
  soon, and with great congratulations from Tom, and Hetty, and Carry,
  and more love than a letter will take, ever your loving Mother,

                                              MARIA EMILY JEX-BLAKE.

  I heartily echo your ‘Thank God.’ I am so thankful I cannot settle.”

A few weeks later Miss Pechey and Miss Clark also passed the
examination.

  “You will like to hear,” writes Miss Pechey, “that Professor Hidber
  told Miss Clark that the Professors were much pleased with your exam.
  and said it was evident that you had studied well. It is more
  satisfactory, I think, to hear it indirectly like that than if they
  had told you so.

  Miss Clark says she is very glad you answered better than I did. So am
  I: I only wish I had answered better for the credit of my
  countrywomen.”

It still remained to get on the English Register through the newly
opened portal of the Irish College. S. J.-B. and Miss Pechey spent some
time in London, reading and attending the Brompton Hospital, where Dr.
Symes Thompson proved very helpful.

There is a sheaf of blank pages in the diary, and then:

                                          “_Sunday, May 6th. Rugby._

  ‘One fight more,—the worst and the last!’ Oh, dear, if I pass this
  Exam. I shall deserve all I may get if I ever go in for another!

  Since Nov. 1st.,—indeed one might say since September 1st,—hardly a
  day of rest and respite, but brain worked at highest pressure—often
  when almost a blank.

  Now it is over and ‘waiting for the verdict.’

  Off tonight for Dublin with E. P. Dr. A[tkins] also to join. ‘Omne
  ignotum pro magnifico.’ The various tests loom vague and large.
  Diagnosis at bedside,—horrible,—though enormously helped by Brompton
  experience. Recognition of drugs and things under microscope. 4
  written exams. 2 hrs. oral, etc., etc.

  I feel as if I really had fairly mastered my subjects and must know
  more than the average medical practitioner just fledged,—not to say
  have more sense.

  But the stake is so enormous. A pluck would be so perfectly awful
  after all antecedents.

  But in spite of my work, my brain is wonderfully well and clear.”

  “_Monday, May 7th. 9.45 p.m._ Books closed after 4½ hours’ reading and
  examination,—not to be opened probably till all is over!

  Be the fates propitious,—as I really think they ought, ... I the most
  comfortable of the three. ‘Where angels fear...?’ No,—I rather think
  on the principle of ‘While the child, etc.’

  I’ve done my utmost,—and results are God’s.”

One is thankful to record that results were safe in His hands (as indeed
S. J.-B. would have said they must have been whatever the examiners had
decided). Two or three days later the three women, with a number of men,
were solemnly summoned to the Board Room,—“repeated declaration after
Registrar, then signed book, and Dr. Hayden, as Vice-President, took the
hand of each and ‘admitted’ us!”

  “Oh, dear, after long travail, good repose!”

  “All dreadfully overwrought and tired. E. P. and I came to fisticuffs
  over Mrs. A.’s Memorial to London University. Pair of fools!”

A characteristic telegram went off at once to Mrs. Jex-Blake:

  “Success just declared for all three of us.”

And within an hour this was followed up by a letter:

  “... We are all so happy! The Exam. has been pretty stiff.

                           Yours lovingly,
                                S. L. J. B. M. D. L. K. Q. C. P. I.”

The waiting Mother sends a mere scrap by return:

  “I don’t know how to be thankful enough that all is so well thro’.
  Nothing will seem a trouble now. God bless you,

                                            Ever your loving Mother.

  _All_ going well with Pony, Turk, me, etc.”

And on the heels of this all the other congratulations pour in. “If I
could I would ring the bells from Bow to Beersheba,” writes a friend and
patient.

One almost feels that, if the bells had known the whole story, they
would have rung of their own accord.




                              CHAPTER XXI
                        THE ROYAL FREE HOSPITAL


The friendly reader will feel, without doubt, that the year 1876-77 had
done something to justify its passage, so far as the women were
concerned, but the year 1876-77 was giving more than this. S. J.-B.’s
main ideal, “Not me but us,” remained to be realized. The fundamental
requisite, training in a large General Hospital, was no longer
practically attainable in Great Britain. A handful of women had scaled
the coveted height by means of steps cut, as it were, in ice that melted
behind them. It remained to prepare a permanent way for those who were
following on. And the year 1876-77 was destined to give this too.

Mrs. Anderson and others had been endeavouring to obtain admission for
women students to some of the wards of the London Hospital, and for a
time their efforts had seemed likely to prove successful. They ended in
the failure to which all the patient workers were becoming so
accustomed, but meanwhile “that which was for”—the women—“was
gravitating towards them.”

Before the end of 1876 Mr. Stansfeld had written:

  “_Private._

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I will bear the London University in mind as soon as I see
  anybody....

  I met Mrs. Garrett Anderson at dinner the other day; she did not seem
  to have much hope or plan about the School in any way.

  I have however something to tell you that I think you will be rather
  pleased to hear. Mrs. Stansfeld and I went to Clapham today to call on
  the Hopgoods, with whom we had become friendly at Whitby: and Mr.
  Hopgood is Chairman of the Board of the Grays Inn Lane Hospital. We
  found them both _with us_, but strange to the question.

  I am to send Mr. Hopgood something to read, and he is to consider
  whether anything is possible there; he _does not appear to be in awe
  of the staff_.

  Just as I had begun to talk the Editor of the Contemporary Review [?
  Nineteenth Century] came in and listened and then expressed general
  sympathy in a timid way, but asked me if I would write him a paper
  shewing a practical way and outcome; and I undertook at once to do so.

  The paper I can manage though I am glad to think I shall be likely to
  see you before I send it; but in dealing with Mr. Hopgood I very much
  wish you were here.... What time in January shall you be back,
  probably time enough for us to act together in the matter.

                                      Yours truly,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

In subsequent letters Mr. Stansfeld writes:

  “Jan. 5th. 77. I shall not consult anyone if I can avoid it. I think
  you and I have the best chance of managing it alone.”

  “Jan. 13. 77. I congratulate you seriously and sincerely; it was time
  to get that particular anxiety off your mind, and to be M.D. at all
  events....

  I will defer what I may have to say till we meet; but we’ll win and no
  mistake.”

                                         “Stoke Lodge,
                                             Hyde Park Gate, W.
                                                Thursday evening.
                                                     [Feb. 9th. 77.]

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have your letter, but feel a little doubtful about seeing Dr.
  Chambers until after Sunday when I am to see Mr. Hopgood.

  You may judge of what that interview should be, how hopeful and how
  critical, by his letter just received, which I copy on the other side.

  I think that you ought to be with me on Sunday if possible. I see
  there are plenty of trains.

  We might be with him say at 3 p.m. If you would come here and lunch at
  1.30 I would drive you down.

  Pray telegraph reply tomorrow that I may write and let him know.

                                    Yours truly,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

Follows the copy of Mr. Hopgood’s letter:

  “I shall be at home all Sunday and glad to see you.... We dine at 5.

  I see my way so far clear that on receiving a formal application from
  your Association it shall be without delay submitted to our Weekly
  Board,—and I think they will forthwith summon a special meeting of the
  Committee of Management, whose _decision will be final for the current
  year_! My wish may be father to the thought, but I think that if you
  can make some such proposition as that we talked of we have a good
  prospect of success.

  My wife feels such a deep interest in the success of the movement that
  she wished me to say that if you think it desirable to form a
  guarantee fund, her name may be put down as a subscriber or guarantor
  to the extent of £100.”

There is no record of that interesting and critical Sunday, but all
seems to have gone as Mr. Stansfeld would have wished, for a week or two
later Mr. Hopgood writes to S. J.-B.,—“I heartily wish that every
success may attend this movement,—if so I know to whom it will be
chiefly due.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

During S. J.-B.’s preoccupations the School had been in other hands.

On March 13th Mr. Stansfeld writes,

  “DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        Have you noticed the article in the Daily News of today on the
  London School of M. It is not written in our interest,—you are not
  mentioned and I not much; but there is a list of names rather new to
  me, omitting, however, Lord Aberdare, a true friend.[130]

  It looks as if tomorrow were pretty certain.

                                       Yours truly,
                                                      J. STANSFELD.”

Footnote 130:

  A very true friend was Lord Aberdare. Here is a delightful letter
  written a few months later:

                                          “Glen Tulchan, Advie, N.B.
                                                June 23. 1877.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,—I yield to your request—an annual subscription of
  £10. 10s. for 5 years, including the present—but with the same
  _Caveat_ which St. Peter made to Pope Gregory when he prayed that that
  virtuous heathen Trajan might be admitted into Paradise viz ‘that you
  make no more such requests.’ For I find extreme difficulty in refusing
  applications for so good a work, and my ‘engagements’ are heavy. By
  this post I must send a reluctant refusal to the hardworking promoter
  of an excellent work.

                                 Ever sincerely Yours,
                                                          ABERDARE.”

Close on the heels of this letter came a telegram:

  “Mar. 15th. Right Hon. J. Stansfeld, London, to Miss Jex-Blake 13
  Sussex Square, Brighton,

  London Free Hospital have unanimously accepted my proposal. Come
  before ten o’clock Saturday. I go out half past ten.”

Once more there was great rejoicing, and Mr. Stansfeld forwards to S.
J.-B. a cordial letter from Mrs. Anderson:

                                                      “March 19. 77.

  DEAR MR. STANSFELD,

        As I was not able to join in the cheer which I am glad to hear
  was given for you at the School on Saturday, will you please accept my
  very heartiest thanks for your grand success at Gray’s Inn Road. We
  all owe more to you than to anyone. I do not imagine there will be any
  difficulty about the £700 a year for five years. I shall hope to be
  able to contribute £50 a year as my share.

                               Yours very truly and gratefully,
                                                    E. G. ANDERSON.”

One thing more that wonderful year had given. Miss Edith Shove, who had
accompanied Miss Pechey on the mission to Ireland, had made formal
application to the University of London for admission to medical
examination and degree. In February Mr. Smith Osier moved in the Senate
that her request should be granted, and the motion was carried by 14
votes to 7. The majority consisted of the Chancellor (Lord Granville),
Vice-Chancellor (Sir John Lubbock, M.P.), Lord Kimberley, Dr. Billing,
Mr. Fitch, Sir William Gull, Mr. Heywood, Mr. Hutton, The Master of the
Rolls (Right Hon. Sir G. Jessel), Right Hon. R. Lowe, M.P., Mr. Osler,
Sir James Paget,[131] Lord Arthur Russell and Dr. William Smith. The
minority consisted of Lord Cardwell, the Dean of Lincoln, Mr. Goldsmid,
Sir William Jenner, Dr. Quain, Dr. Sharpey and Dr. Storrar.

Footnote 131:

  The following interesting letter shows that Sir James Paget’s attitude
  at this time was not that of a partisan but of a just man:

                                        “1, Harewood Place,
                                               Hanover Square, W.
                                                       Feb 26. 1877.

  DEAR MR. STANSFELD,

        I intend to go, if possible, to the Meeting of the University
  Senate on Wednesday that I may vote against hindering the entrance of
  Women into the Medical Profession. I think them sadly mistaken in
  wishing for it, but I see no sufficient grounds on which they can
  justly or usefully be excluded.

                      Believe me most truly yours,
                                                        JAMES PAGET.

  The Rt. Honble. James Stansfeld, M.P.”

S. J.-B. received the intelligence in the following note from Dr.
Archibald Billing, the father of the profession, who had taken his own
degree at Oxford in 1818:

                                                 “34 Park Lane,
                                                             1/3/77.

  “DEAR FRIEND,

        All right. I was at my post and gave my opinion rather freely.
  We had a majority about two to one, but you shall have the minutes as
  soon as printed. Some of the medicos rather recanted.

                                Yours sincerely,
                                                   A. BILLING.”[132]

Footnote 132:

  This letter may probably have been written to Mr. Stansfeld.

One last storm was raised in Convocation about the action of the Senate,
on the ground that it dealt with the Faculty of Medicine only, but this
final obstruction only proved the truth of Mr. Stansfeld’s wise dictum
that when the hour for reform has come all that opponents can do is to
widen its character or to precipitate its advent. On January 14th, 1878,
a new Charter admitting women to _all_ degrees was laid by the Senate
before Convocation, and was carried by a majority of 241 to 132.

                  *       *       *       *       *

So much good that year had brought—that _annus mirabilis_ 1877—one must
not be surprised if it brought some evil also. And, to S. J.-B.
personally, it dealt one heavy blow. The School, as her Mother said, was
her living child. She had conceived it, brought it forth, tended it,
fought for it,—done most of the daily work it involved, with the help of
a lady secretary she herself had trained. Until she was a qualified
doctor, however, she did not wish her name to appear either on the
Council or on the Governing Body. In all the early papers it occurs only
as Trustee.

But she had always looked forward to her registration as something that
would initiate a new order of things. That platform gained, and the dust
of the struggle and fight left behind, she expected to take officially,
as Honorary Secretary, the position she had filled hitherto without any
recognition at all. Up till now she had been constantly harassed,
driven,—striving for something that always receded when it seemed within
her grasp. No wonder if she had often been hasty, high-handed,
difficult. Now all that, so she thought, was past. We recall the dreams
and ideals of her youth,—how she had longed to organize some fine new
school for girls, of which, conceivably, she might be worthy to be the
head.

  “I am beginning to hope, Mother! If I only suffer enough—and I don’t
  believe mine will ever be a smooth or easy life—I may yet be fit to
  _be_ the head for which I am looking so earnestly.”

We have seen with what searchings of heart she laid aside this ideal for
the long struggle of her medical career; but from first to last she
never laid aside the sympathetic interest in her colleagues and juniors
which was perhaps the most striking characteristic of her professional
life. Is it strange if she now looked forward to a realization of the
whole dream ?

In any case that realization was not to be. Her enforced absences in the
matter of her examination had given people a chance to do without her.
We have seen that they had not always found her particularly easy to
work with. “You wouldn’t let me muddle, and you wouldn’t let me dawdle,
and how _could_ I be happy?” one of her “daughters” used to cry in the
radiant success of later years: and although it would not be fair to
generalize this into a solution of the whole difficulty, it goes a long
way to account for it. There were those who were thankful that things
should be done a little less efficiently and more easily,—thankful to
have a little more say in matters for which they felt themselves
partially responsible. There were those who looked forward with sinking
of heart to the time when S. J.-B. would return and really take up the
reins.

We have seen repeatedly that she never realized the strain of
“difficulty” in her own nature, and she always had a cohort of loyal
supporters; but she must have heard—or guessed—something of what was
going on, for she wrote to Mr. Stansfeld that the task of being Honorary
Secretary was too onerous to be undertaken except at the unanimous wish
of those concerned. Perhaps Mrs. Thorne—Dr. Atkins—Mrs. Anderson—would
care to undertake the task? Probably she knew for a fact that the two
first named would refuse it; and it must have seemed impossible that
Mrs. Anderson—overwhelmed as she was with other work—would entertain the
suggestion.

S. J.-B. was still in Ireland when the question came up. Mrs. Thorne
proposed S. J.-B. as Honorary Secretary, and someone else proposed Mrs.
Anderson, both nominations being duly seconded.

Mrs. Anderson was in a difficult position, and said so frankly. She did
not wish to take an unfair advantage over her colleague; but if it was
to be for the good of the School—?

Mr. Stansfeld and the Dean (Mr. Norton, who was always S. J.-B.’s
staunch supporter) were somewhat at a loss, and so no doubt were others;
it was not an easy situation for anybody. After some talk the meeting
was adjourned. Everything pointed to Mrs. Anderson’s election.

But, when it came to the point, this was more than S. J.-B. could stand.
Many lesser people would have accepted the situation gracefully,
concealing any heartburning they might have felt, but this was just what
S. J.-B. could not do. It was partly a personal question, of course.
With every desire and effort to be fair, Mrs. Anderson had always looked
at S. J.-B.’s life and work through the wrong end of the telescope, so
to speak, and it is not easy to appreciate fully the people who make no
secret of the fact that they take that view of us.

But the personal question was not all. We remember how warmly S. J.-B.
had spoken of her colleague in the old days, as “running where I
crawl,”—how she had triumphed in every stage of her colleague’s success.
She honestly felt that Mrs. Anderson was already too fully occupied to
undertake so big a job,—felt that, humanly speaking, Mrs. Anderson
_could_ only lend her name, and do the work by proxy.

And even that does not exhaust the subject. The truth is that S. J.-B.,
to the day of her death and with all her faults, was an incorrigible
idealist; and Mrs. Anderson, rich though she was in excellent qualities,
seemed to her to be lacking in certain capabilities of insight and
imagination which outweighed everything else.

“Put me utterly aside if need be!” she had cried in the self-surrender
of her adolescence.

And now she was taken at her word. But it was not easy to see the “need
be.” For a time it was blotted out by the bitter experience of personal
opposition.

It was a painful situation all round, but like so many painful
situations, it called forth something fine. Mrs. Thorne was _persona
grata_ with all parties, and finally Mrs. Thorne stepped into the breach
and allowed herself to be elected Honorary Secretary of the School.

“About the best possible,” wrote S. J.-B. in her diary, “with her
excellent sense and perfect temper. So much better than I.”

It involved a definite sacrifice, for, although Mrs. Thorne had taken
all her classes with distinction, she had only passed one professional
examination; and she was not one of those who are content to scrape
through. She had aimed at a London degree, and had even talked of taking
her whole course over again in order to fulfil every requirement. Dr.
Sewall had long since singled her out as “_the_ doctor” in potentiality
among the English medical women.

Already family claims had made her pause. This new claim, combined with
the others, proved more than she could withstand. She cast aside her own
ambitions, and made the success of the School her main object in life.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                  “Sweet Sackermena and her isles!
                  See how many yards and miles
                  It takes to walk round Sackermena.”

A breezy way this of paraphrasing the more familiar passage:

              “Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.”

But what one really wants to express is,—See the amount of work, the
number of people it took to achieve this one bit of human evolution!
Even the many names in this book are culled from a great multitude.

It was S. J.-B. who opened the subject boldly up, and forced the whole
world to discuss it. It was she who—in the eye of the whole world—led
the Edinburgh fight to its unforeseen sequel in Parliament and in the
opening of the London School.

Miss Pechey was a loyal and stimulating comrade throughout, disarming
opponents by the personal charm, intelligence and humour which
eventually opened the Irish College and gained the actual concession of
the right of registration.

Mrs. Thorne contributed a fine undercurrent of stability. It was not her
way to write picturesque letters that lend themselves to quotation, but
it was mainly owing to her that the London School became a lasting and
conspicuous success.[133]

Footnote 133:

  In later years, as Dean, Mrs. Anderson did much for the enlargement
  and development of the School.

_Pari passu_ with all this, as we have seen, and antecedently to any of
it,—Mrs. Anderson was quietly showing the English world that a woman can
be a reliable and successful doctor.

Fine records all four, and surely no less fine was the brave, wise,
unwearying championship of Professor Masson and Sir James Stansfeld,
without whom—humanly speaking—nothing could have been achieved at all.

Sir James Stansfeld would not have allowed us to draw the line there. In
an able sketch of the whole movement up to 1877, in the _Nineteenth
Century_, he concludes his survey with the following significant words:

  “One thing more remains to record. These pages will, I think, have
  presented to the reader’s mind evidence of a tough and persistent and
  continuous struggle. Such struggles do not persist and succeed,
  according to my experience, without the accompanying fact, the
  continuous thread, as it were, of one constant purpose and dominant
  will. Dr. Sophia Jex-Blake has made that greatest of all contributions
  to the end attained. I do not say that she has been the ultimate cause
  of success. The ultimate cause has been simply this, that the time was
  at hand. It is one of the lessons of the history of progress that when
  the time for a reform has come you cannot resist it, though, if you
  make the attempt, what you may do is to widen its character or
  precipitate its advent. Opponents, when the time has come, are not
  merely dragged at the chariot wheels of progress—they help to turn
  them. The strongest force, whichever way it seems to work, does most
  to aid. The forces of greatest concentration here have been, in my
  view, on the one hand the Edinburgh University led by Sir Robert
  Christison, on the other the women claimants led by Dr. Sophia Jex-
  Blake. Defeated at Edinburgh, she carried her appeal to the highest
  court, that most able to decide and to redress, the High Court of
  Parliament representing the Nation itself. The result we see at last.
  Those who hail it as the answer which they sought have both to thank,
  in senses and proportions which they may for themselves decide.”[134]

Footnote 134:

  _Nineteenth Century_, July 1877.

It would be easy to close on this note, but it is on the earlier part of
Sir James Stansfeld’s conclusion that one prefers to dwell. A tough and
persistent struggle is indeed recorded in these pages—it was only on
working through the vast mass of original documents that the present
writer formed the faintest conception how tough and persistent that
struggle had been—and yet what will strike the reader most is that it
was emphatically _not_ a “one man fight.” S. J.-B. never said “I” in
connection with it. “You see we were so splendidly helped,” was her
almost invariable comment on looking back.

And she _was_ splendidly helped. Not only by her fellow-students, by
friendly professors, by the Editor of the _Scotsman_, and by those who
would fain have been her patients. All that one was prepared to find.
The amazing thing is the way in which—when all of these were almost
paralyzed by the strength of the opposition (yes, and by her mistakes)—
_help came from somewhere_. It might be the working-man, sending her a
shilling to represent his sympathy, or the statesman in a London club,
throwing down his newspaper with the determination that that woman
should be baited no longer. In any case help came.

Truly, as Sir James Stansfeld said, the time was at hand.

And Newman is perfectly right when he says that, if the individual be
powerful-minded and the cause good, the mistakes actually help. They
increase the talk, increase the interest, help to make the picture that
appeals to the popular imagination, till what has seemed to be the
eccentric action of a single individual spreads out in waves that
envelop the whole earth.

Writing exactly forty years after the events just narrated—at a moment
when women doctors are proving so vital an asset to the nation and to
humanity at large—one realizes the difference it would have made to the
whole world if Sophia Jex-Blake had been content to qualify abroad and
to slip on to the Medical Register somehow, instead of throwing the
gates wide open for all who were to follow her.

Reference has been made above to her love of poetry, and of all her
poems there was none she was wont to recite more solemnly than Kipling’s
_Explorer_:

   “Yes, your ‘Never-never country’—yes, your ‘edge of cultivation’
     And ‘no sense in going further’—till I crossed the range to see.

   God forgive me! No, _I_ didn’t. It’s God’s present to our nation.
     Anybody might have found it but—His Whisper came to Me!”




                               _PART III_

  My fame is in the hands of others. I have weighed in a nice and
  scrupulous balance whether it is better to serve men or to be praised
  by them, and I prefer the former.

                                      SYDENHAM.
                            (Quoted in S. J.-B.’s commonplace book.)

  Have I named one single river? Have I claimed one single acre? Have I
  kept one single nugget—(barring samples)? No, not I.

                                                            KIPLING.

  Your goodness must have some edge to it,—else it is none.

                                                            EMERSON.




                               CHAPTER I
                         EARLY DAYS IN PRACTICE


The dramatic days were over. The task that now lay before S. J.-B. was
to pick up all that remained of herself after the conflict, and settle
down to practice. It is a solemn moment in the history of any doctor
when he or she deliberately takes in hand the issues of life and death:
mistakes can no more be avoided in this than in any other walk of life,
and yet the consequences here are so much more _apparently_ important.

And if it is a solemn moment for any man or woman, it was surely not
less so for her who for years had been a city set on a hill. In the
course of the long struggle youth had quite slipped away; her best
energies were spent; her nervous system was overstrained beyond the
possibility of complete recuperation. If George Eliot could say with
some truth that she began _Romola_ as a young woman and ended it an old
one, how much more might S. J.-B. have said this of her education in
medicine. Perhaps the coward in her would gladly now have shunned the
conflict altogether.

Small say was allowed to that coward at any time, and at this juncture
few even of S. J.-B.’s friends realized that—as regarded output of
energy—she had already done a life’s work. No one would have been
surprised if she had died a few years before, in the stress of the
fight; but the human memory is short, and, as she had survived, almost
everyone now looked upon the toil of the last ten years as simply the
introduction to the volume. She was now expected to show how great a
success a woman doctor can be.

First came the anxious question where to settle, and, while she
meditated on this, she was making good, at Brompton and wherever she
could find an entry,[135] the deficiencies in her hospital education.

Footnote 135:

  We hear of her visiting the Middlesex, Moorfields, the Royal Free, the
  Cancer, and the Children’s Hospitals.

Her original plan had been to settle in London, to foster the School she
had founded, and at the same time to be within easy reach of her
Mother,—the Mother for whom she would at any moment in her life have
thrown up every hope and plan that guided her.

There is no doubt that this would have been in most respects the ideal
arrangement. There is room for everyone in London. In those days it was
absolutely essential for a woman doctor to settle in a town large enough
to allow for the overwhelming proportion of patients who declined to
take their lives in their hands, so to speak, by trusting one of their
own sex. Even if the patient herself was willing to lean her whole
weight on an untried plank, husbands and mothers stood in the way.
Indeed there were girls who reckoned it the prime luxury involved in
earning their own living that they became free to employ the doctor of
their choice—a woman.

It is true that patients—and still more their male relatives—were
readier to trust S. J.-B. than they would have been to trust most other
women. Her inherent motherliness was not weakened by any aggressive
femininity; but on the other hand it is not to be supposed that she was
any less alarming than she had been as a student. No doctor ever
inspired greater enthusiasm and devotion than she did, but it was on the
whole the few to whom she appealed. Her vein of tenderness lay too deep
for the casual eye to see; and many were afraid of the occasional high-
handed imperious ways and the disregard of what people were likely to
say.

“It was like being lifted on a comet’s tail,” writes a patient to whom
she had been called in an emergency in March 1878, “when you came in,
strong and swift, with your eagle wings, getting over distances in a
third of the time other people take to do it.”

This is admirable, and describes what many felt, but although being
lifted on a comet’s tail is exactly what many patients want, the
treatment is not universally applicable.

London, then, would probably have supplied S. J.-B. with a larger
practice than she could have worked; many friends, and particularly her
brother, were keenly anxious that she should settle there; Mr. Norton
always regretted her departure; but, now that the School had been taken
out of her hands, it seemed inadvisable that she should remain as a
looker-on. The difficulty was to find another place big and
representative enough: she dreaded the great midland towns. After much
consultation, she decided on the last place on earth she might have been
expected to choose,—on Edinburgh.

It was partly the bracing climate, partly the beautiful drives, partly
the many friends who had stood by her so gallantly, that led to this
spirited decision, but on the whole it was a mistake. The smoke of the
conflict was still hot, and some of those who had admired her most had
admired her for qualities which were not what they sought in a
physician.

Moreover, she was the last person on earth to play up to the
expectations of the community in which she lived. The Edinburgh of those
days was a more conventional place than Edinburgh is now, and doctors
above all were expected to conform to a particular standard. There was a
general impression that piety paid and that an interest in missions was
a great help to success in practice.

“You never will succeed unless you conform to these usages,” said a
friend: “You might have Edinburgh at your feet if you would go to church
regularly and show yourself a religious woman,” said another.

It is needless to say that these were not the arguments to use with S.
J.-B. Never, moreover, since the far-off school-days in which she had
given a highly-valued shilling to “the Jews” had she taken any interest
in missions. That vein in her was worked out, or transmuted into
something else. The more she read of the old religions—and she did read—
the more she found in them to admire and respect,—the more it seemed to
her that they were the fitting medium for the training of the people to
whom they had been given. It must be frankly admitted too that she
continued to see such questions in the atmosphere of the particular
Evangelical school in which she had been brought up; in recognizing the
evolution of the individual—of herself as an individual—she failed to
recognize the evolution of the medium; and her life was so full of
active beneficent interests as to leave scant time for the consideration
of questions that did not at first sight appeal to her,—that did not
seem to be her job.

In the Edinburgh, too, of those days, the ordinary people who “counted”
were the people who liked things done “just so.” It disturbed their
sense of the fitting, for instance, that S. J.-B. should pay
professional visits, driving herself in a pony phaeton. Altogether she
was too big, too untrammeled for the post. What was wanted was the woman
who is a credit to any cause she may adopt. There are plenty of them
now-a-days.

Finally, S. J.-B. realized from the first that, with her limited
physical resources, she could not combine a social with a professional
life. Hospitality is a poor word to describe the manner in which her
door stood open to the few she loved, to those whom she thought she
could help, to all in whom she recognized any sort of spiritual kinship;
but from ordinary social engagements she stood aloof. She refused
invitations to dinner,[136] or made excuse to leave so early that she
might better, perhaps, not have gone; she declined to be lionised in any
way; and she was apt to snub those whom she suspected of wishing to know
her from motives of curiosity.

Footnote 136:

  For the same reason she went but seldom to the theatre, unless an
  actor whom she greatly admired visited Edinburgh. When Henry Irving
  was there she would go as often as three times a week, and usually
  take a little party of friends. Louis XI. was, in her opinion, his
  masterpiece. For Miss Terry she had, like all the rest of the world, a
  great admiration. Of Ristori she used to speak almost with bated
  breath.

We must not forget how different she could be from all this,—how
radiant, how sympathetic, how full of humour and fun. “What a comfort it
is,” writes a patient at this time, “to see your dear supporting face!”
“You always come as Hercules did to Alcestis,” writes another. “Emily
and I have often spoken of your ‘How are you?’ being like his, ‘I am
here to help.’”

Nor am I working up to the avowal that she was a professional failure:
she was not: in many ways she was a great success. But if Edinburgh—like
Cousin Ellie of old—could have made “even a slight alteration” in her,
she might almost indeed have had the town at her feet.

                  *       *       *       *       *

She took the house 4 Manor Place, and in June 1878 she put her plate on
the door and began. Three months later she started a small dispensary.
Her professional isolation was great: Dr. Pechey was at Leeds; the other
medical women were in London or farther afield. A doctor in the early
days is sorely handicapped if he cannot discuss difficult cases and
questions with his contemporaries and seniors. S. J.-B. never had,
except for a few days at a time, the daily chit-chat—what students call
the “shop”—that is so helpful; but she was not allowed to suffer. Dr.
Heron Watson, Dr. George Balfour, and Dr. Angus Macdonald supported her
with a chivalrous loyalty of which it is difficult to write calmly even
now. They encouraged her to appeal to them at any time: they put the
whole wealth of their learning and experience at her disposal; and—what
was not a matter of course in those days—there was not a single question
in all the complicated domain of medicine which they would not discuss
with her as frankly as if she had been a man. It must be borne in mind
that in her own special subject, the diseases of women, her equipment
was all that could be desired. It was not for nothing that she had
worked for two years under Dr. Sewall at Boston. If adequate training
had been available, she might have made a great gynæcological surgeon,
for she had great calmness and presence of mind in an emergency, and her
hands, though full of character, were small and deft. Dr. Sewall always
regretted the waste of her potentiality in this respect.

The following extracts are from letters written during the first few
months of practice:

To her Mother,

  “MY DARLING,

        I know you will be pleased to hear that I yesterday received
  fees which just completed my first £50,—earned in Edinburgh in less
  than three months,—and that in what they call the “empty” season. And
  what pleases me still better is that everyone of my patients has done
  well. Several have left my hands practically recovered, and those who
  are still there are all going on satisfactorily. And as among them
  were two cases to which I was called when the patient was described as
  ‘dying’ (and both got well) I think I may very well be content. I have
  had 23 patients (nearly 100 visits) at my private house, and about as
  many more at my Dispensary, which has only been open a fortnight; so I
  don’t think there is much doubt about the ‘demand’ nor about my
  prospects.”

To Dr. King Chambers,

  “I feel I am learning a great deal from the large variety of practice
  here. You will see from the enclosed paper that I have the help and
  support of four[137] of the best medical men in Edinburgh, and they
  are all excessively kind in giving me advice and help as often as I
  want it. No one ever had better friends and I doubt if anyone ever
  liked a profession better than I like mine.

  I find that each of my cases involves so much reading and thinking
  that I am almost anxious they should not multiply too fast.”

Footnote 137:

  The three mentioned above, together with Dr. Peel Ritchie. In later
  years, of course, she would have added to the list,—notably the names
  of Dr. (Sir Thomas) Clouston and Mr. C. W. Cathcart.

To Dr. (now Sir Thomas) Barlow to whom she had commended a young
colleague,

                                                “March 24th. [1879.]

  DEAR SIR,

        I thank you very much for the kind response to my note which
  reached me this morning. I feel sure that you will find Miss K.
  grateful for your kindness and most anxious to benefit by it. I have
  had repeated cause myself in my own Dispensary work to be thankful for
  the various lessons I learned from you and Dr. Lee.

  Thank you also for the kind interest you express in my personal
  success, which indeed is all that I could desire. I have about 25 or
  30 patients at the Dispensary every day that it is opened, and I also
  have a much larger private practice than is usual at so early a date.
  I have not yet been established here in practice quite 9 months, and I
  find that I have already had about 400 visits to or from private
  patients, which I think you will allow shows the ‘demand’ is a real
  one.

  As you refer to the ‘general question of lady doctors’ you must allow
  me to say that I am quite sure it would have your support, from at any
  rate one point of view, if you had the least idea of the amount of
  preventible suffering which women bear with rather than consult men in
  special cases....

  Now I do not care for a moment to argue whether this feeling is right
  or wrong; ... if the feeling exists it should be distinctly recognized
  as an element in the question; and I am quite sure that you would be
  one of the very first to desire that every possible remedy should be
  brought to such needless suffering.

  In the same way I never care to argue at all about the relative
  capabilities of men and women. I mean to try to do my own work up to
  the very best of my power, and that is all that really concerns me. I
  cannot imagine any work nobler or more perfectly fascinating, than
  that of medicine, and I am very thankful to be allowed ever so small a
  share in it.”

To Mrs. Henry Kingsley,

  “I have full as much work at my Dispensary as I can manage, indeed I
  am pretty well used up on those days, but I always enjoy them.

  I am just going to begin a course of lectures which I hope may be
  successful.

  It is hard work altogether, but nothing to the old worries.”

Hard work indeed it was, especially when one bears in mind that she was
urged at times to undertake confinements at a very considerable
distance,—as far off as Yorkshire. Moreover, being a woman, she had of
course the cares of housekeeping, and S. J.-B. always took her
housekeeping very seriously.[138] She was herself a good cook and an
excellent manager, and her staff were expected to carry out her methods
and principles loyally. If they happened to be lazy and unprincipled, or
even easy-going, their tenure of office was likely to be brief. Her
comfortable home—in common with all the other gifts of the gods—meant
nothing to her unless she could share it. How heartfelt was her
hospitality may be gathered from the following letters:

                                             “August 15th. [? 1878.]

  DEAR MISS IRBY,

        Welcome home again! I saw in yesterday’s paper that you had
  reached England, and was going to write when your letter came. I shall
  be delighted to see you again! I expect to be here all autumn and
  winter (with the exception of a few days) and shall be only too glad
  to have you whenever you like best to come. Only do manage to give me
  at least a week, and let me know which time suits you best as soon as
  possible, so that I may make my plans suit yours.

  Several people are most anxious to meet you, so I will ask them to
  dinner, etc., when you fix a time; but I hope you won’t accept
  invitations much (you are sure to have dozens) as I do want you to get
  a little rest while with me, and I want to take you drives about
  Edinburgh,—the country is so lovely. I shall tell everybody you will
  be too tired to go out much.

  Would you like a public meeting here? I daresay it would help, though
  most residents are away at this season.

                                 Yours affectionately,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

Footnote 138:

  The invaluable Alice had retired from service to join a sister in
  Wales. She and her mistress continued to correspond till the end.

                                                 “June 16th. [1879.]

  DEAR MRS. THORNE,

        I hear that your two girls are coming to Morton next week. Don’t
  you think it would be very wrong to let them travel so far all alone?
  Don’t you think it is clearly your duty to come and stay a week or two
  with me when you arrive? I should like so very much to see you again
  at something like leisure, and also to show you my Dispensary and all
  and sundry I am doing here. _So_ many Edinbro’ friends would like to
  see you! _Do_ try to come if only for a week or two!

  I remember that the ‘wonderful woman’ went to London and back for 24
  hours once, so she can’t mind travelling! In haste

                                   Yours sincerely,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

                                                         “June 18th.

  DEAR MRS. THORNE,

        I shall be really _delighted_ if you will come down with your
  girls and spend a week or two with me while they are at Morton. You
  and I have never had any really quiet time together since our student
  days, and I cannot tell you how much I should enjoy some talks with
  you, and how glad I should be of your advice about lots of things in
  my Dispensary and otherwise. Dr. Sewall you know always said you were
  _the_ doctor among us, and I quite believe it. I wish so very often
  that I could ask you about things.”

To a colleague in London she writes a month or two later:

  “Your thanking me so much for a very moderate amount of good nature
  shown to Miss X., makes me wonder how you _expect_ one to behave to
  people who are ill and poor. I am sure you yourself act upon the ‘aux
  plus déshérités le plus amour’ principle? Seriously I have done very
  little for her beyond what I should have done for anybody more or less
  in her position, except perhaps half a dozen drives and dinners which
  I promised ‘pour l’amour de vos beaux yeux' before I saw her.

  I am afraid you must think me a very ungrateful person in my turn, for
  I don’t _say_ a quarter as much about your various kindnesses to me
  and my friends.”

She always had a word of brave and wise advice for colleagues who
appealed to her:

  “I am inclined to think you had better send Miss Z. off to Australia.
  I am sure Miss Du Pre will gladly do her part if you write to her
  about it. She is now at ‘Surbiton, S.W.,’—no farther address required.

  I think you are _quite_ wrong to think you will ‘not forgive yourself’
  if the plan does not succeed. I have long ago come to the conclusion
  that ‘efforts are ours, results are God’s,’—and, if you don’t like
  that phraseology, you can paraphrase it as you like, so long as you
  acquiesce in my conclusion that we are _not_ to blame or worry
  ourselves if things go wrong when we have done our best.

  How I wish we could sit by that upstairs window and have a chat over
  it all!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

  “No, life isn’t a bit of a failure, and you wouldn’t think so if we
  could get ten days’ holiday together up in the highlands!—don’t I wish
  we could!—for I am very tired too.

  I’ve got to go off to Yorkshire in a few days to attend ——’s
  patient....

  My coachman got drunk last week, and I turned him off at an hour’s
  notice, and had to see to the stable myself for a day or two!—My whole
  household has been upside down, and in the midst of it my dear old
  Turk died last week, but quite quietly and without pain. I have a new
  page, and a new cook, and a new groom,[139] and am going to have a new
  housemaid,—don’t you pity me?—Still I say ‘Life is good,’—Can you have
  better testimony?”

Footnote 139:

  In place of the “coachman”; she never had both.

Her advice on occasion could be fairly drastic:

  “Yes,—I know about Miss W. _Why_ do you _let_ her stay 1½ hours with
  you? At the end of five minutes I should take out my watch and say,—
  ‘Now I have just ten minutes more for you,—is there anything you want
  to say?’ That’s the way to treat those sort of folks. _I_ am not ‘too
  good for this world.’”

Here is a rather amusing answer to a question from Dr. Pechey,—“Why do
you recommend Vermouth?”

  “DEAR EDIE,

        I sent off my two cards to you too hurriedly to answer about
  ‘Vermouth’!—but now let me say at my leisure that I never heard
  anything more beautifully illustrative of the way stories are
  ‘evolved.’

  The one and only occasion when I made acquaintance with Vermouth was
  when one day, during a hurried call at Mrs. Nichol’s, the dear old
  lady in Mr. F.’s presence, offered me some Vermouth as something new
  she had got, and insisted on my tasting it,—which I did, and said I
  thought it ‘very nice,’ as in duty bound! Neither before nor
  afterwards have I either seen or heard of it! It really _is_ nice, I
  think,—in the orange bitters line,—but further I know nothing about
  it, and certainly never recommended it in my life—nor expect to.

  My professional life is, I find, largely a crusade against tea and
  alcohol, so certainly I am not likely to preach up new liqueurs—if
  this is one.”

To Dr. Sewall she writes,

  “Oct. 8th. [1879.] ... I have a very charming little brougham, which
  my Mother gave me; and a beautiful horse, quiet as a lamb and strong
  as a bull, from Miss Du Pre. Altogether it is an extremely smart turn-
  out, and I should like so much to show it to you! I hope I shall this
  summer. You _must_ come then if possible,—it is so hard to be apart so
  many years!

  I am so sorry my Father’s carriage is worn out. That little gift was
  such a pleasure to him and almost the last thing he did. I think the
  letter in which he told me he had paid the money to my bankers was the
  very last I had from him—dear old man!...

  Dr. King Chambers gave the inaugural address at our School this year,
  I moved the vote of thanks to him,[140] as it was my one day in
  London. I will try to send you a report.”

Footnote 140:

  This was probably _not_ the occasion of which she writes in her
  diary,—“S. J.-B. made very nice speech in moving vote of thanks,—only
  forgot to thank much!”

Later she writes,

  “I have rather a sore heart today, for dear old Turk has just died in
  my arms.... He seemed about as usual today, but rose from where he was
  by the kitchen fire, walked into the scullery and fell over. They
  fetched me, and he gave just two gasps in my arms and died. It seems a
  bit of one’s life gone, when he had been in it for 13 years!—and a
  Boston bit too.”

  “Nov. 29th. 1879.... We are in great excitement here with the visit of
  Gladstone to Edinburgh,[141] and his speeches. I send you two papers
  today, to show you how he alludes in one speech to the sympathy of
  women with his cause,—I have written a short letter in today’s
  _Scotsman_ asking if it would not be better that they should be able
  legitimately to express that sympathy through the Suffrage.... How I
  hope and trust to see you here next year!”

Footnote 141:

  This was the celebrated visit to contest the County of Midlothian,—a
  “triumphal procession”!

Apparently Miss Pechey did not think Gladstone’s appreciation of women
sufficiently adequate to be worth acknowledging, for a few days later S.
J.-B. writes to her,

  “I like Gladstone much better than you do, or I shouldn’t have written
  as in the _Scotsman_, but no doubt he is wrong about women,—his wife’s
  fault however, I fancy. Miss Irby went to stay with them for a day or
  two last year, and I know he admires her hugely,—perhaps she may be a
  means of grace to him.”

It was about this time that the opinions of a number of representative
women were collected on the subject of the Suffrage. S. J.-B. at first
declined to respond, but, on Miss Irby’s remonstrance she wrote the
following lines, which are quoted here because they represent fairly the
calm and decided attitude she took upon the subject throughout life:

  “If I correctly understand the British Constitution, one of its
  fundamental principles is that Taxation and Representation should go
  together, and that every person taxed should have a voice in the
  election of those by whom taxes are imposed. If this is a wrong
  principle, it should be exchanged as soon as possible for some other,
  so that we may know what is the real basis of representation in this
  country; if it is a right principle, it must admit of general
  application, and I am unable to see that the sex of the tax-paying
  householder should enter into the question at all.

  The argument respecting the ‘virtual representation’ of women under
  the present system seems to me especially worthless, as it can be
  answered alternatively thus:—If women as a sex have exactly the same
  interests as men, their votes can do no harm, and indeed will not
  affect the ultimate result; if they have interests more or less
  divergent from men, it is obviously essential that such interests
  should be directly represented in the councils of the nation. My own
  belief is that in the highest sense, the interests of the two sexes
  are identical, and that the noblest and most enlightened men and women
  will always feel them to be so; and, in that case, a country must
  surely be most politically healthy where all phases of thought and
  experience find legitimate expression in the selection of its
  parliamentary representatives.”

As regards the medical education of women S. J.-B. never for one moment
lost interest in the movement as a whole. If her hand was no longer on
the helm, she never deserted her post on the bridge. A new Medical Bill
was on the _tapis_ at this time,—a Bill which—very rightly—made it
essential that all doctors should hold a qualification in both medicine
and surgery. As, however, no College of Surgeons would examine women
(who nevertheless had gone through the required surgical _training_),
this Bill would have had the result of placing women on a different and
inferior footing to men as doctors, and the hard-won steps that had
seemed to be cut in the solid rock would have melted away once more.

The General Medical Council, in its suggested amendments to the Bill,
proposed to establish a special Board for the examination of women, and
to admit them in the end to a separate register! It was the old
“strawberry jam labels” over again. Moreover in order to conform with
the requirements of this Board a woman must be in a position to assert
that she had received _no part of her education_ along with men,—a
requirement that at once ruled out all the women who were enjoying the
great privilege of studying at the University of Paris.

So there was small encouragement even now to relax that keen look-out on
the bridge.

In Dr. Heron Watson, who was at that time President of the Edinburgh
Royal College of Surgeons, S. J.-B. had a keen and sympathetic adviser,
and with his approval she wrote to her former supporters, Mr. Stansfeld,
Lord Aberdare, Lord Ripon and others, begging them to keep a watchful
eye on the interests of the women. Early in the spring of 1878 she had
urged Mrs. Anderson to write to two or three of the London daily
newspapers on the subject, while she herself undertook two or three
more; and on April 19th she writes again:

  “DEAR MRS. ANDERSON,—It occurs to me that it would be well for the 8
  registered women to send up a distinct protest against the new Medical
  Bill to strengthen the hands of our friends in both Houses.

  I have made a rough draft of what I should propose, and enclose a copy
  to you, while also forwarding one to Mr. Stansfeld. Before doing
  anything further I shall wait to hear what you and he think about it,
  and whether you have any alterations to propose.

  If the plan is adopted, can you tell me how we can get Dr. Blackwell’s
  signature? There is no great hurry, as the petition need not be
  presented for three or four weeks.

                                       Yours truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

To Mrs. Thorne she writes some months later,

  “I had a long talk with Dr. Watson yesterday, and he tells me the
  Government is likely to drop the Medical Bill for this session. I
  shall be rather sorry if they do.

  If they do _not_, I hope you will make a point of ‘keeping the run’ of
  every proposed amendment, and of watching very carefully how each may
  affect women. I should look out very sharp if I were in London, but
  here it is impossible to do so with sufficient efficiency and
  promptitude; so please don’t let anything slip. The matter is almost
  more important than School affairs, and even friendly M.P.’s are too
  busy to be trusted and often they don’t see the bearing of phrases.
  Mr. Stansfeld, Mr. Cowper Temple or Dr. Cameron, could any of them get
  papers for you, but they need reminding.”

Amid these manifold interests life ran its course in the early years of
practice. The happiest times were those when Miss Du Pre came to stay
with her friend, and it was the dream of S. J.-B.’s life that these
visits might develop into constant companionship. No one who was not a
doctor ever took a more sympathetic interest in medical questions than
did Miss Du Pre: her advice in difficult social and professional
problems was invaluable; and then there was her delightful sense of fun!
“The only witty friend I ever had,” S. J.-B. says about this time. And,
added to all was her sheer goodness and interest in the poor.

  “32 at Dispensary,” writes S. J.-B. in her diary. “One or two so
  hungry and forlorn that they went to my heart. Oh, dear, if only J.
  [Miss Du Pre] were here to do her half of the work!

  No motto of mine that over the Venice monastery, ‘O solitudo, sola
  beatitudo!’”

It is needless to say that Miss Du Pre’s visits were as long and as
frequent as the many other claims in her life made possible, and in her
absence she entered as of old into every detail of her friend’s life.

Of course this friendship could not but take in great measure the place
of the old enthusiasm for Octavia Hill, though the latter never died.

In May 1877 someone had told S. J.-B. of the “terrible trouble” Miss
Hill was in. “Oh, dear,” she cried in her diary, “I’m ashamed of the
first sort of thrill of triumph that she should know how it hurts!”[142]

Footnote 142:

  It was not till later—not perhaps till she saw that regrettable number
  of _Fors Clavigera_ that S. J.-B. had any clear idea what the trouble
  was.

  “My life is full and complete again,” she writes in April 1878, “if
  somewhat greyer for all the past pain; and, if I can have J., the
  former things may abide in shadow till the day of restitution of all
  things. I can’t but believe that _some_ day, some _where_, I shall
  learn what it all meant,—even now one sees in some measure ‘why it
  could not be otherwise.’

  It is at any rate a grand thing that, over and through all, each has
  kept on at her work and done yeoman service.”

  “Dear L. E. S. turned the tide, gave me back the beginning of strength
  and life, physical and mental, and since then for the last 12 years I
  have stumbled steadily onwards,—gaining in strength and calm and
  hope,—till at length I can feel a wholesome life of my own—quite
  independent of the old pain,—with a very dear hand in mine, and with a
  grand life of work and struggle against disease before me.”

On the last night of that year she writes:

  “‘Tarry thou the Lord’s leisure,’ ... ‘and He shall strengthen thy
  heart.’...

  I believe profoundly in the ‘that He might be able to succour’. One
  does learn through pain what one never learns without,—and, hard as it
  is to _feel_ it, I suppose one knows the ‘power of ministration’—the
  ‘Lo, I come’ _is_ higher and more than even the personal happiness.

  So—take and use Thy work.

  What is the use of _talking_ about presenting ourselves a ‘living
  sacrifice,’—and then moaning over pain,—wanting to ‘freeze on a warm
  night’!

  Oh, dear!—one’s own littleness.

  Well, God teach and guide us all.”

A few weeks later she comes to the end of the volume, and writes in a
sunnier vein:

  “Yet surely,—‘hitherto He has helped us’—Look at beginning of this
  book,—or stronger still look back some 17 years and see how the light
  has arisen out of darkness,—and shall it not grow and grow.

  I fully believe ‘God is very merciful to those who suffer _young’_.
  How much harder the other way.

  And much to be thankful for in health. No neuralgia,—very great return
  of brain power....

  Who can look forward?—who dare plan?

  Domine dirige nos!”




                               CHAPTER II
                     LAST ILLNESS OF MRS. JEX-BLAKE




So far S. J.-B.’s success in Edinburgh had been on the whole greater
than most of her friends had anticipated. The experiment could never
have been made, had not Mrs. Jex-Blake agreed to spend her winters in
Edinburgh. S. J.-B. was a good deal blamed by other members of the
family for urging this arrangement; but it must be borne in mind that
although Mrs. Jex-Blake was in fairly good general health, she was
subject to sudden alarming attacks of illness which had repeatedly
brought her daughter hundreds of miles in hot haste to the sick bed,
regardless of the studies, or the still more important affairs she was
leaving behind.

Modern methods would have grappled with the illness at its source long
before the patient had reached her present age, and a radical cure might
have restored her to perfect health: as it was she lay under a sword of
Damocles, and was regarded as a more delicate woman than she really was.

It was impossible for S. J.-B. to embark on medical practice under these
conditions; so the Sussex Square house was given up, and the old lady—
who elected to have her own _ménage_—divided her time between her
daughter in Edinburgh and her son at Rugby.

“You have always been different to me from my other children,” she said
to S. J.-B.; and, if she spoke with a consciousness of the sword in her
heart, the words were mainly a tribute to her younger daughter’s
untiring devotion, and remained in later days the source of comfort they
were meant to be.

Towards the end of April 1881 Mrs. Jex-Blake went south, leaving her
daughter more reluctantly than usual. It was only those who knew S. J.-
B. very intimately who were at all aware of the effort it sometimes cost
her to get through each “day’s darg,” and to keep a bright face turned
to her patients and a brave face to the world at large. She was more
tired than usual at the end of that winter, and Mrs. Jex-Blake was well
aware of this.

The usual series of love letters passed between Mother and daughter:

                                           “Eastfield,
                                                 April 30th. [1881].

  OWN DARLING,

        I am really well, but feel only half of myself without you. I am
  _very_ good,—I sleep well, eat well—_two_ hot dinners a day,—but, as I
  was very tired, keep my room, it is so much easier to be quiet there.
  Florence quite mothers me....

  You may be sure Dobbs is most attentive—and backs anything she advises
  with the

                           _Dr.’s wishes_....”

                                                “4 Manor Place,
                                                      Edinburgh.
                                                            May 1st.

  ... Many thanks for your dear little letters, but you mustn’t scribble
  too much to anybody!—Such sweet leaves in today’s note!

  Yes, my darling, I miss my dear old lady _very_ much, but we are both
  going to be very good, and get quite strong for our reunion in
  September. I shall be very grateful to you if you keep up your ‘two
  hot dinners’ honestly, and all the rest of it.... It breaks my heart
  to find you run down as I do year after year when I come to fetch you
  back again.

  I don’t know exactly when Ursula comes, but you will hear from her.

  Dr. M‘Laren is back,[143] and so vexed to have missed saying
  ‘Goodbye’!

                                   Yours lovingly,
                                                              SOPH.”

Footnote 143:

  Dr. Agnes M‘Laren had taken the house adjoining S. J.-B.’s.

Towards the end of June Mrs. Jex-Blake was less well, but the doctor who
attended her saw no cause for anxiety. On the 28th, however, alarming
indications of the old enemy showed themselves suddenly, and he
telegraphed to S. J.-B. to come immediately. There was one more rush
south “on eagle’s wings,” but fortunately this time S. J.-B. had the
companionship of Miss Du Pre, with whom she reached Rugby at 2 a.m.

The patient had been given up by the doctor and by all, and even S. J.-
B., when she saw her, thought she was dying; but she fought for the
precious life with every fibre of her being, refusing to own defeat and
absolutely regardless of her own health. For ten days and nights she
scarcely left the room. The doctor in attendance was only too glad that
she should have a free hand, and after a few days they sent for Dr. King
Chambers, in whose skill S. J.-B. had almost unlimited faith. His visit
proved reassuring.

  “Her life hung so evenly on the balance when I left,” he wrote next
  day, “that I was obliged to acknowledge to myself that my trust in her
  recovery was a sanguine one. Please one line about her, and, if it is
  a favourable one, I shall answer it by a little advice to yourself,
  which you will in that case be in a condition to take.”

On July 7th all looked well, and S. J.-B. felt the wonderful supporting
power of hope, but, on the following day, there was a sudden turn for
the worse, and at half past six in the evening, the patient passed
quietly away.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The event is recorded in the diary by a great sheaf of blank pages, with
a pathetic notice from the _Times_ in the middle of them.

That is all, but constantly for a year, intermittently for many years,
the diary recurs to the old longings and regrets, the gropings and
questionings, the heart-searching and tears, that have followed every
great bereavement. The reader of the preceding pages will not need to be
told that S. J.-B. drank the cup to the dregs.

There were not a few who had lost in Mrs. Jex-Blake their dearest
friend, but everyone’s first thought was of her younger daughter.

“I do hope,” writes that wise Heron Watson, “that you are not overborne
by over much sorrow.”

“No human being loses what I do in her,” S. J.-B. wrote to her friend,
James Cordery, and this was perfectly true. No one had loved her Mother
as she had; no one else had the same cause; and no one else had the same
appalling capacity for suffering.

It is interesting to note that of many beautiful letters of sympathy
there is not one that strikes the reader as more truly comprehending
than does Mrs. Anderson’s:

                                        “4 Upper Berkeley Street, W.
                                             July 13th, 1881.

  DEAR MISS JEX-BLAKE,

        I have seen with very great regret the notice of your sorrow.

  Knowing as I do how very close and tender was the tie between you and
  your Mother and also what a fine and ennobling influence she must have
  been to all within her range I am very full of sympathy for you. It is
  always very sad to break away from the past by losing one of these
  main links with it, but in your case there is very much to increase
  your sense of this. You have not (as so many others unhappily allow
  themselves to do) outlived the tenderness of the relationship. I hope
  that after a time it will be a comfort to you to remember this and to
  recal how happy she was in having so much affection from you.

  I was very sorry to find I had written on business last Sunday at such
  a time.

                               Yours very truly,
                                                    E. G. ANDERSON.”

S. J.-B.’s own letters are calm and restrained, of course. To her
assistant in Edinburgh she writes,

                                                         “July 11th.

  ... Thanks for your kind note, and [your Mother’s] kind
  thoughtfulness.

  But nothing would grieve me more than needlessly to part a Mother and
  daughter who still have each other, and I beg her to remain with you
  at least as arranged until the end of this month during which time I
  shall almost certainly remain here and try to get rested.

  It was a hard battle,—it was bitter to fail just when we seemed
  winning, but I believe it was her wish to go. On Thursday I heard her
  murmur quietly, ‘Oh, Father, I pray Thee take me home,’—and now all is
  peace.

                                  Yours sincerely,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

About the work in Edinburgh S. J.-B. had no anxiety at all. It was her
way, when she trusted people, to trust them whole-heartedly, and she had
absolute confidence in the assistant who had worked with her for more
than a year. Well, indeed, she might, for she was extraordinarily
fortunate in that gallant-hearted and faithful young helper, whose only
fault seems to have been that she threw herself too completely, too
conscientiously, into everything she undertook,—her chief’s work and
interests, together with her own studies and laboratory
experiments.[144] S. J.-B. never realised what a responsibility her very
trust was to one wholly worthy of it.

Footnote 144:

  She was working at the solubility of fats, and the ether fumes were
  supposed to have proved insidiously poisonous.

In any case the double burden on the young shoulders proved too great,
and there was a sudden and tragic breakdown ending in death.

One wonders how S. J.-B. bore the double shock. She had fancied herself
“girt with the girdle of him who has nought,” when the second blow fell.
She always said herself that she never could have won through but for
Miss Du Pre, who simply carried her off to quiet places and tended her
and brought her gradually back to the possibility of beginning again.

The practice in Edinburgh was given up for the time. There was nothing
else to be done. Miss Ellaby took up the threads and finished them off
as well as a stranger might; but there was no medical woman free to
remain and fill the niche. It was hard on the practice.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In later years S. J.-B. met Mr. Frederick Myers, and she was induced by
her impression of him to read his _Human Personality and its Survival of
Bodily Death_, when it appeared some time later. She was deeply
interested in the book, and her mind was open on the subject always; but
she “tried the spirits” severely. “No human being,” she said one day in
the course of an earnest talk, “could strive to come into touch with one
gone before more earnestly than I tried to come into touch with my
Mother. I used to lie awake at night concentrating every faculty on the
effort. But I got no response.”

Her diary became her great outlet again in those dark days, in some
places almost, as of old, a very cento of beautiful or poignant thoughts
from the treasure-house of her memory; but that was never the side she
turned to the world, though intimate friends got glimpses of it that
startled them. One guessed it too from her anxiety to spare others the
pain she had suffered herself.

“Don’t you ever go through the farce, dear, of thinking you haven’t been
good to me,” she said to a friend years after this; and, although
throughout life she often spoke hastily and over-sharply, she never
spoke a word that might poison the night-watches for those she left
behind. Coventry Patmore’s terrible poem[145] could never have been
inspired by her.

Footnote 145:

  “Poor Child.”

To one of her nieces she writes:

                                                   “Sept. 2nd, 1881.

  DEAR ——,

        I found the enclosed treasured among Grandmamma’s most valued
  papers, and I am sure you will like to have it back and to see how she
  kept and cared for it through so many years....

  I think all your life it will be a pleasure to you remember how much
  you added to her happiness and helped to take care of her during the
  last few years. She always said you were ‘a little mother’ to her.

                          Your affec. aunt,
                                                           S. J.-B.”




                              CHAPTER III
                          PATIENTS AND FRIENDS


It was hard to go back to the house in Manor Place, so full of
associations, and, as soon as might be, S. J.-B. and Miss Du Pre removed
to Bruntsfield Lodge, a roomy, rambling old house[146] with a shady,
high-walled garden, standing high on the south side of Edinburgh,
overlooking Bruntsfield Links. The sunny rooms and the possibility of
stepping out into quiet greenness were worth a fortune to the strained
nerves and over-active brain.

Footnote 146:

  This house is now the picturesque nucleus of the Edinburgh Hospital
  for Women and Children.

  “You will be glad to hear that I am much stronger,” S. J.-B. writes to
  Dr. Sewall in September 1883, “and am sleeping excellently. I have
  just begun also to take short rides, and I do not think they tire me
  too much.”

Here then she began the life of comparative seclusion and active
beneficence which was to last for sixteen years. The keynote of her
existence was sharing, taking others with her, and the joy of sharing
this comfortable house and garden was very great.

Miss Du Pre’s absence is the occasion for some playful letters written
quite in a patriarchal spirit:

                                               “August 25th. [1883.]

  ... _I_ have had an addition to my family as well as Mrs. B.,—though
  it isn’t yet in the _Times_ first column,—viz. a delightfully comic
  small dog, white with one black eye, whom I have christened Toby, and
  whom I bought from the Home for Lost Dogs for the large sum of 2s. 6d.
  The police take stray dogs there, and if no one claims them, or buys
  them, they are killed; so this little fellow has escaped by the skin
  of his teeth, in virtue of his supposed excellences in the cat-chasing
  line![147] Has cottoned up to me most amusingly—followed me about all
  day, and whined at the door when shut out....

  The two boys are delighted, of course,—especially A., who declares Mr.
  Toby to be the moral of a dog for whom his late master ‘wouldn’t take
  £100.’ Nice profit wouldn’t it be if I clear £99. 17s. 6d.!

  Lest the household should be too full, I have sent off a member,—viz.,
  White Angel, to grass for a week at Currie,—H. being so overjoyed at
  being let ride him out that cook declared he ‘couldn’t eat his lunch‘!
  He walked back (6 miles) in 1¾ hr., not bad, was it?

  Miss A. is coming tonight,—Mrs. J. went this afternoon. By the bye on
  Thursday she asked me to ‘see Baby for a minute,’ and I found the
  child white and out of sorts, rather feverish, etc., and overjoyed
  Mrs. J. by prescribing ‘a little Bruntsfield’. So she has been out
  here for 2 days, tumbling in the hay and delighting Ann’s heart. She
  is so fond of children.

  I also sent Mrs. S. off to Brackenrigg yesterday, as I decided she did
  want a change before beginning a winter’s work. The fare was 17s. 4d.,
  and I gave her the rest of £4, which will pay everything for 10 days,
  with 5s. or 6s. to spare. I haven’t heard from her yet, but I am sure
  she will be in the seventh heaven.

  Probably she will see Miss Anthony there,—she went the previous
  day....

  I think it _was very_ good of you to ask for the Baring votes!...”

Footnote 147:

  S. J.-B. made great friends with the birds in her garden, and cats
  were accordingly taboo.

                                                         “Sept. 4th.

        ... Mrs. S. lunched here today, and says she feels infinitely
  better for the change,—things no longer worry her in the same way. She
  tells me that the red-room gentleman was back,[148]—and that being
  confined to bed one day, he evidently heard Miss Anthony haranguing on
  Women’s Rights in the next room,—and Mrs. W. told them that he had
  asked ‘when those two ladies were going,—for he heard enough to know
  they were men-haters, and _he_ was a woman hater!”

Footnote 148:

  S. J.-B. and Miss Du Pre had visited the same hotel that summer.

                                                         “Sept. 9th.

  I’ve had another addition to my family,—_not_ a permanent one this
  time! A. J. was very anxious not to catch scarlet fever so as to be
  thrown back for his examinations, etc., and so I have taken him in for
  a few days, and given him ——’s room upstairs. (Do you think W. is in
  any danger?) He seems a very nice lad, but by no means strong. He is
  so very pleased with the quiet,—he says he can sleep _so_ much better.
  Now a lad of his age ought to be able to sleep in any row!”

                                                        “Sept. 13th.

        ... The grapes are getting on famously, some will be ripe
  within a week I think, but they will be rather small this year.”

                                                        “Sept. 23rd.

        You needn’t have asked so meekly for ‘2 or 3 grapes’. We
  have cut none yet, but when they first began to colour, the most
  forward bunch was dubbed ‘Miss Du Pre’s,’—and for the last 10 days
  the household might be seen every morning with upturned chins
  gazing to see ‘if Miss Du Pre’s bunch is ready’,—H. going up the
  ladder and hanging in all sorts of odd positions to look at it all
  round.

  The combined wisdom has decided to cut it tomorrow—in spite of a
  red berry or two which won’t get right,—so probably you will get
  it on Wednesday morning by P.P. Be sure to tell me how it
  travels.”

The first few months in the new house were a time of comparative
leisure, and S. J.-B.’s friends received letters less telegraphic in
their succinctness than they afterwards tended to become. The
following is to Mrs. Brander, who (when Miss Isobel Bain) had
accompanied S. J.-B. to America:

                                                “Sept. 26th. [1883.]

  DEAREST BEL,

        I wish you could peep in and see my new house now that it is
  fairly in order. I think the quiet and airiness will be of very
  great value to me. I have felt much better since I came here....

  You have so often wished for good medical women in India that you
  must now be pleased to have your wish granted. I don’t know if you
  know Mrs. Scharlieb who is just entering on practice at Madras,
  but, if you don’t, I wish you would go and call on her, and give
  my card. I do not know her personally, but I have corresponded
  with her, and respect her much for the gallant way in which she
  got her education, first at Madras and then coming to England to
  perfect herself. She passed the very difficult examinations of the
  University of London (M.B. and B.S.) with great distinction, and
  won the gold medal in Obstetrics from the whole University....

  Have you heard also that Dr. Edith Pechey is going to settle at
  Bombay? She has been invited to do so by a committee of native
  gentlemen, who guarantee her an income and find her a hospital....

  I am very sorry to lose her from England, but very glad to have so
  admirable a representative in India. She always wins golden
  opinions and does such excellent work. I do hope the Government
  will do something for her. I have just written to Lord Ripon about
  her.

  You know I suppose that Mr. Fawcett has appointed a medical woman
  (Miss Shove) as medical officer to the women post office clerks,
  with £350 a year. It is an immense step in public opinion.

  I am getting on very well here, but I begin to feel I am getting
  old. My hair is so grey!...

  Dear old Mrs. Brander came to see me the other day, looking as
  nice as ever, ... I think I care more and more for old people’s
  happiness as compared to young, though the world is hard enough
  for them too sometimes,—and hardest of all I sometimes think for
  the middle-aged folks who have outlived the spring and energy of
  youth and not reached the calm of age. How much pain one sees in
  the world!

  I hope _your_ life is getting easier and happier every year, dear
  child. Tell me all about yourself some day....

                                    Yours affectionately,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

She was planning a new edition of her book, _Medical Women_, at this
time, and she wrote to Mr. Osler to ask for statistics as to the
percentage of women, as compared with men, who had so far passed the
examinations of the University of London. In reply to his
information she writes:

                                                    “Feb. 3rd. 1884.

  DEAR MR. OSLER,

  I can hardly express strongly enough how grateful I am both to you
  and to Mr. Milman, for the very valuable tables of numbers sent
  me....

  Please do not doubt for a moment that I quite agree with you that
  it is unfair to compare ‘picked women’ (i.e. really in earnest)
  and ‘unpicked men’. I have said so repeatedly. But you must
  remember that a _very_ few years ago I had a very hard fight to
  get it admitted as a possibility that _some_ women _might_ do as
  good work as men. In ‘Visits to American Schools’ (published 1867)
  I wrote with at least sufficient diffidence,—‘Whether most women
  would be capable of the amount of study required, for instance,
  for one of our University degrees, I really do not know,’ etc. My
  one contention has been all along,—‘Give a fair field and _try_’—
  and no one can exaggerate the gratitude that all women ought to
  feel to the University of London for giving that field.

  At the same time, while quite conceding that ‘percentages’ need
  correction by certain considerations on the men’s side,—youth,
  want of choice, etc.,—you must not forget that women are quite as
  much weighted in other ways,—e.g. by the greater reluctance of
  parents to spend money on their education, and the more
  inconsiderate claims made on their time, etc., at home, inferior
  early teaching, etc., so that after all one set of difficulties go
  far to balance another.

  From a medical point of view my chief anxiety now is how women are
  going to stand the strain; I am _very_ much afraid of seeing the
  movement discredited by the breakdown in health of girls who begin
  too young, or with inadequate physical stamina, or who try to
  ‘burn the candle at both ends’ by combining society or home duties
  with serious study.

  However, I must not trespass longer on your time and kind
  patience, and with repeated thanks, I remain,

                                Yours very gratefully,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

This subject of the education of girls had been brought prominently
before her mind by the breakdown of a rarely gifted young friend. S.
J.-B. had some great talks on the subject with Miss Buss and others,
and she wrote to various papers about the danger of over-pressure.
“The headmistresses have a difficult problem before them,” she says,
“but it has got to be faced.”

As a matter of fact the problem was destined to be solved abundantly
in due course by the development of games and physical culture
generally,—all that side of life for the lack of which she herself
had suffered so terribly.

She was specially interested, of course, in the daughters of her old
friends, and, of these, Hermione Unwin and Katie Ballantyne held a
special place in her regard. To the former she writes:

                                                   “July 29th. 1884.

  MY DEAR HERMIE,

        Thank you for sending me your examination papers. I am very
  glad that you passed so successfully. What now interests me most
  is to know to what use all this work is to be turned, for after
  all knowledge is noblest when it becomes an instrument of work
  beyond itself. Have you any tastes or wishes, or any thought of
  any special kind of work?

  I daresay that after all this study the best thing you can do is
  to rest on your oars for six months or a year, but during that
  time I hope you will be thinking in what way you can turn yourself
  to best account. There is so much that needs doing in the world,
  and it is such a privilege to help in the doing of it. I hope you
  will write and tell me when you have any definite thoughts on the
  subject.

  I have already had my holiday for this year, having spent June in
  driving about (with the white pony) in the Perthshire highlands
  with my friend, Miss Du Pre. I think there is hardly any kind of
  holiday that rests one so much. You should persuade your Father to
  take you all in a waggonette, a long drive into Scotland or to the
  English Lakes. If you should decide on Scotland, I should hope to
  find this house used as a stopping-place. I think I could take you
  all in pretty comfortably.

  Remember me very kindly to Mr. Unwin, and believe me

                                    Yours very truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

Here is an interesting letter to an old friend whose husband’s
distinguished career separated her for the time from a dearly-loved
daughter:

  “I much enjoyed seeing her for the flying visit which was all she
  vouchsafed me, and I am _delighted_ to see how very much she is
  improved,—very much more healthy in mind and body all round....

  She amused me much by plunging headlong into some theological
  difficulties,—which reminded me of how she (aged 6!) used to
  harass you about the Trinity. Her great trouble seems to be that
  she can’t feel sure the world is governed by a beneficent and
  omnipotent God,—she thinks there is so much pain in it which
  wouldn’t be allowed unless God either _didn’t wish_ to help it, or
  _couldn’t_ help it. That has never been my difficulty,—I have
  always had such a devout belief in the possible blessing of pain,—

                 ‘Because all noblest things are born
                 In agony.’

  Do you remember Miss Cobbe’s hymn?

  However she asked me if _I_ felt sure the world was governed,
  etc., and I said frankly that I hadn’t absolutely made up my
  mind,—that it seemed to me we had very small means of being ‘sure’
  of anything,—but that I thought, if there was a Ruler both good
  and all powerful, it was at least perfectly conceivable that He
  might allow all the pain, etc., partly because the very theory of
  free will involved possibilities of evil with its consequences
  which not even Omnipotence could avert, and partly because He
  might see that pain was at any given moment the very best thing
  for the person who suffered it.

  Then she went off to,—Did I think it _possible_ that any Being
  could follow out the lives of millions of creatures at once,
  etc.,—to which I said that certainly I couldn’t conceive how it
  should be possible; but neither could I conceive many other things
  that yet we knew to be scientific truths,—e.g. that our whole
  earth could be swallowed up in one of the ‘spots’ of the sun, and
  not fill up the spot, and that that very sun is only a unit in a
  myriad of worlds whose immensities simply reduce us to silence.

  However I didn’t mean to inflict a réchauffé of all this upon you,
  though I think you will like to know how the child’s mind is
  working. Let it work!—being in a wholesome atmosphere of love and
  labour, she will learn all sorts of practical replies to
  theoretical difficulties, and come to no harm.”

Interesting, as bearing on the above, is another letter written to
someone else about the same time:

  “It is a double principle with me never to bring forward
  theological questions, and never to seek to change the opinions of
  anyone who is satisfied with his or her own; and on the other hand
  to be always ready to say exactly what I think myself about any
  given point to any intelligent person who cares to ask me the
  question, and to say frankly where I feel that I know nothing. I
  do not think anyone can possibly be more conscious than I of the
  immense vastness and difficulty of questions that the general
  public answer glibly offhand, and of my own utter incompetency to
  decide in the abstract ‘what is truth’. Practically I think one is
  generally able to see one’s own duty day by day, and probably
  Browning is right—

                ‘... more is not reserved
                To man, with soul just nerved
                To act tomorrow what he learns today.’

  Beyond that, I suppose that all that any of us can do is to be
  very chary of either asserting or denying, but to strive to keep
  our whole souls open to every ray of light we can get, and hope
  some day to learn everything that it is needful for us to know.
  Personally I am always getting to feel that opinions matter less
  and less, and motives and feelings more and more.

  Excuse this long dissertation and believe me,

                                       Yours sincerely,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

In December 1885 she writes to Miss Du Pre:

  “Yes, we shall miss poor old X. sadly. It does seem pathetic,
  doesn’t it?—and yet don’t you think it is something to be taken
  away just when you _have_ attained your highest ambition?... The
  first thing I thought,—as it almost always is,—was, I wonder what
  he thinks now that he ‘knows what Rhamses knows’. It always does
  strike me so very curiously when someone who has never, I suppose,
  thought half as much as I about the mysteries of life and death,
  goes in in front of me,—if there is any ‘going in’. I thought it
  so very strongly about Vanderbilt. How _will_ he get on where
  everything isn’t reckoned as on the Stock Exchange?”

Although the new house was certainly not in a central position, S.
J.-B.’s practice steadily grew. As the first woman doctor in
Scotland, she had, as she had told Sir Thomas Barlow, numerous cases
that had long gone untreated, and she was the recipient of many a
pent-up confidence. The Edinburgh that criticized her would have
been surprised if it had known some of the secrets that lay, so
safely, in her keeping. She was often called upon to be a Mother
Confessor, and, although she always declared that “one profession is
enough for one person,” her practice was by no means so rigid in
this respect as was her theory. Many strange problems were discussed
in that quiet consulting-room, with its book-lined walls and green
spaces outside. To the end of life her impulsiveness led her into
mistakes for which she had to suffer, but her advice to others was
extraordinarily sane and good. Yet the idealist in her never slept.
“I took Colani from the shelf,” she says on one occasion, “and read,
‘Cast _thyself_ down,—for the devil can suggest; compel can he
never.’”

She was often asked, too, to take a resident patient who wished to
have her own suite of rooms and sometimes her own attendant. More
than one of these patients became personal friends.

She of course received high fees for cases of this kind, but she
often had resident patients who paid no fees at all. Some governess
who could not get well in dreary lodgings would be simply wrapped up
in blankets and carried off in the brougham—or was it on a comet’s
tail?—a messenger having been sent up to the house,—“Have blue room
ready in half-an-hour. Am bringing patient.”[149]

Footnote 149:

  “Ah,” said an old servant in later years. “We did see life in that
  house!”

  “I wonder,” writes a patient at this time, “if you have any idea
  how pleasant it is to be lifted on somebody’s shoulders and
  carried away from the shadows of your own life into the brightness
  of theirs. No I do not think you can have; you do not seem to have
  dwelt in the shadows.”

And another writes,

  “I know you will believe me when I say that I have rarely, if
  ever, been so _supremely_ happy as during the past few weeks. The
  feeling of peace and comfort was so delicious, and I only wish I
  could prove myself just a little worthy of all I have enjoyed.”

We have seen how on one occasion she took in a lad who could not
afford to risk incurring the infection of scarlet fever. On another
occasion, when visiting a patient, she was asked to see a boy of
ten, who had unluckily fallen ill while paying a short visit to the
house. His hostess did not understand boys, and he was having an
uncomfortable time. His plight roused all the boy—and there was
plenty of it—in S. J.-B. She carried him off, mothered him, took him
for drives when she could, got him well, and apparently made him
happy. At all events, when the time came to say Goodbye, he flung
his arms round her neck and kissed her!

There are some men who are born with an instinctive knowledge of the
right thing to do in unusual circumstances.

Most useful was the comet’s tail in cases where some overworked
brain was on the point of a breakdown, where a worry was developing
into an _idée fixe_, and threatening to drive the patient mad. S.
J.-B. would carry the patient off, regardless of possible
developments more disconcerting even than an outbreak of scarlet
fever in her house, tend her, feed her up, make her sleep,
sympathize with her, bully her, laugh at her, till the patient was
ready to fall into line and laugh at herself. Some of these “cures”
were extraordinarily rapid and complete, and there is no record of a
single failure.

[Illustration:

  _from a photograph by M. G. T._        _Emery Walker ph.sc._
  _Sophia Jex-Blake_
]

She never heard of any over-weighted woman or child without asking
herself whether she could lift the burden.

  “DEAR CARRY,”—she writes to her sister about this time—“... I
  don’t like the idea of our teacher looking ‘pale and anxious’,—do
  you know if she has any special troubles?—or is likely to be short
  of money? Has she relations with whom she spends her holidays? or
  is she at Bettws now?—When do the holidays begin and end? What pay
  has she now?—Has it been raised lately?—What is her name and
  nation?

  A sad number of questions, but very short replies will suffice.

                                    Your aff. sister,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

It was partly because she had so many guests of this kind that she
made it an absolute rule that none of her servants were to receive
gratuities from visitors,—a rule that some of the visitors disliked
extremely, and even refused to submit to. Such cases sometimes led
to an amusing breeze of correspondence of which the following is a
sample:

  “SIR,

        Well acquainted as I am with your many and great iniquities,
  I confess that I did _not_ expect you wantonly to abuse our humble
  hospitality by deliberately inciting our household to rebellion
  against constituted authority as distinctly announced to you by
  written warning on the mantel-piece.[150] Manifold as are the
  notorious vices of the Conservative mind, I _had_ supposed it to
  have some slight reverence for law, national or domestic. In
  future I shall know better.

  Sir, the humble but incorruptible member of my household whose
  integrity you sought to corrupt, begs me to re-inclose to you the
  accompanying lucre (2s. 6d.), of whose history you so falsely
  pretended yourself ignorant, and as I see no reason why I should
  be impoverished in consequence of your evil doings, _I_ request
  you to repay me on your return from the continent the commission
  charged by H.M. Government (viz. ½d.) upon the enclosed
  remittance.

               I am Sir,
                      Yours more in sorrow than in anger,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

Footnote 150:

  “_On est prié de ne rien donner aux domestiqúes._”

The postal order was indignantly returned, with a request to do what
she liked with it, so she at once sent it to the London Society for
Women’s Suffrage, directing the secretary to forward the receipt to
her refractory Conservative guest!

Notwithstanding this, and other differences of opinion, he paid many
more visits to her house, and for the future contrived usually, at
least, to elude her vigilance.

She used to consult him in all sorts of legal difficulties, and he
replied with unfailing patience.

  “DEAR JAMES,”—she wrote on one occasion,—“I want to make a
  codicil, leaving some money to ..., the income to her for life,—
  the capital between her daughters. Will you please tell me the
  simplest words in which I can do this?”

In sending a rough draft, he inserted the words,—“if only one such
daughter.”

  “Of course I can put in ‘if only one such daughter,’ if you like,”
  she replied, “but at present there are seven!”

The initial mistake, of course, was hers, and it was a kind of
mistake that was very unusual with her.

Her correspondence was very large,—so large that she never had time
to write a “proper letter about ‘Shakespeare and the musical
glasses’,” as she would have said. To her most intimate friends she
wrote with spontaneous charm,—letters circumstantial, tender,
nonsensical, as the case might be. “Do you _ever_ write any letters
that would look well in your memoir?” asks Miss Du Pre. “I begin to
be anxious about that book. It seems to me that it will be so
fearfully dull,—unless your diaries ... prove to be amusing.”

On the other hand, strangers consulted her about manifold schemes
and perplexities, and she always asked herself how she could help.

“Dear Madam,” wrote one of these, “As you sit alone in the evening
with the curtains drawn, imagine that a woman steals into your room,
_hunted to death by men_. I am that woman....”

Even this sensational beginning did not put S. J.-B. off, and it was
weeks before she allowed herself to be persuaded—by Dr. Pechey and
Miss Du Pre—that the case was one for Dr. Clouston rather than for
her.

                  *       *       *       *       *

But it was in her Dispensary, with working women and girls, that one
saw her, perhaps, at her best. She was so vital, so sympathetic, yet
so full of humour and common sense that the regular provident
patients were devoted to her. They knew there was nothing to be
gained by arguing. “Well, I must just take my scolding,” they would
say resignedly. So keenly did she sympathize with their difficulty
in following out her directions in their own homes that in 1885 she
added a few beds to the Dispensary, and thus formed the nucleus of
the Edinburgh Hospital for Women and Children, which has since grown
to great things and has been honoured by a visit from the Queen.

Where the case was serious, and the remedy lay in the husband’s
hands, S. J.-B. always took the bull by the horns. “Ask him to come
and have a little talk with me,” she would say breezily. “Tell him I
can see him at such and such hours.” And he would come!

She was admirably fitted for work of this kind. No woman was ever
more strictly fair. An injured husband was no less—and no more—sure
of her sympathy than was an injured wife.

And, of course, it was the old and feeble who at once found the
radiant side of her.

  “The thanks and blessings of old J. G.—85—bring a rush of tears,—
  ‘Ah, somebody be good to my old lady!’

  And yet I suppose she may be ‘old’ no longer, but young and strong
  and bright, and sorry for _my_ weakness and weariness,—

                     ‘waits on the hills of Paradise
                 For her children’s coming feet.’”

She seldom rose quite above this sense of effort and weariness,
though few would have guessed it. “I always get so much good from
being with you,” writes Lady Jenkinson,—“body and soul—especially
soul.... I wish _you_ would ’fess when you feel downcast.”

In her inmost circle, of course, she did ’fess, pretty often. “Not
strong enough for the place, John,” she used often to quote
whimsically from _Punch_. And here is an interesting bit of heresy
in a letter to Dr. Sewall—

  “I don’t at all agree by the bye with your theory that ‘there is
  nothing like work for producing real happiness.’ I don’t find that
  it has even any tendency to produce it, though of course one
  _must_ work if one is able. ‘Otherwise she drops at once below the
  dignity of man,’—so says Aurora Leigh.

  To quote Mrs. Browning again,—‘What’s the best thing in the
  world?—Something _out of it_ I think.’”

The reader will not need to be told that the poetry of her nature
had not been crushed out by that long fight. Far from it. All
through the strenuous days she had been supported by the very poems
she had repeated by the fireside in Sussex Square, but the store had
grown till her repertory must have been nearly unique. To many
passages from the Psalms and Isaiah, George Herbert, Trench, Alford
and others, she had added a harvest from Whittier, Emerson, Lowell
and divers less known American poets. She loved her Tennyson and
Browning too—_Abt Vogler_ and _Rabbi Ben Ezra_—but indeed the
“poetry book-case” included a very catholic range, from Macaulay’s
_Lays_ to Swinburne and Christina Rossetti, with a corner for Jean
Ingelow and for Mrs. Hamilton King. We have seen the store she set
in her youth on some of Sadie’s Poems. No one who has ever heard it
will forget how the “pathetic voice” would repeat:

 “Is it so, O Christ in Heaven, that the highest suffer most?
 That the strongest wander farthest, and more hopelessly are lost?
 That the mark of rank in nature is capacity for pain,
 And the anguish of the singer makes the sweetness of the strain?—
 ‘I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them now.‘”

or again,

       “No, no, by all the martyrs, and the dear dead Christ;
       By the long bright roll of those whom joy enticed
       With her myriad blandishments, but could not win.
       Who would fight for victory, but would not sin.

       By these our elder brothers who have gone before,
       And have left their trail of light upon our shore.
       We can see the glory of a seeming shame,
       We can feel the fulness of an empty name.”

It was recitations like this that formed the nucleus of the
“incomparable evenings in the Doctor’s Study” to which Dr. Lillie
Saville referred (see pp. 390-1, footnote). When life was not too
exacting—and sometimes when it was—such evenings were very frequent,
and they were a great refreshment after the burden and heat of the
day.

                  *       *       *       *       *

She derived much relaxation, too, from the best of the unceasing
current that flows through the circulating libraries. Her brief
criticisms of books are often interesting. She was disappointed in
George Eliot’s _Life_, because the long series of letters was not
sufficiently welded together by narrative. Of the Carlyles she
agreed with Mrs. Oliphant that “there was a great deal of love on
both sides,—with very raw nerves.” Of two books she confessed to
Miss Du Pre that she “sobbed over them like a baby,”—one was _Laetus
Sorte Mea_, the other _The Little Pilgrim in the Unseen_.




                               CHAPTER IV
                              PUBLIC LIFE


It is not to be supposed that the “cataracts and breaks” were a
thing of the past. There were many who found S. J.-B. a delightful
person to work with, but even they had no difficulty in seeing how
it was that others had a different experience.

“But the Doctor is _nearly always right_,” said one of her
assistants in later years, “when she differs from other people.” And
this was perfectly true. She _was_ nearly always right; but the few
times she was wrong were sufficient in many quarters to give the dog
the proverbial “bad name.”

Moreover, one must frankly admit that her rightness was often too
uncompromising, too business-like, too far in advance of what other
people could be expected to agree with, too inconsiderate of
ordinary human frailty. “You treat other people like pawns,” Miss Du
Pre used to tell her, but, although she quoted the remark, she never
seemed really to grasp it.

During the first few years of her life at Bruntsfield Lodge she took
a great interest in local women’s questions. She was a moving spirit
in the organization of one or two large suffrage meetings, and in
the laborious propagandism and canvassing involved in the election
of women as poor law guardians. Evidence of the thoroughness of her
work persists to this day; but it was not always appreciated by the
Edinburgh ladies who coöperated with her. They thought her so big
and masterful that nobody else got a chance. It was just as well
that her own special work absorbed her more and more. In 1884 she
had written for Macmillan (at the instigation of her friend Mrs. S.
R. Gardiner) a useful little book on _The Care of Infants_, which
was warmly received by the profession and by a considerable public,
and she was steadily taking notes for a second edition of her
_Medical Women_, which should bring the narrative down to the date
of publication.

Public affairs, too, demanded their share of interest. That weary
Medical Bill kept cropping up at intervals, and S. J.-B. was often
appealed to privately by members of parliament and others for
information and advice. They were well aware, of course, that her
main interest was to safeguard the rights and privileges of women,
but they also knew something of her mental acumen and thoroughness
of method. Moreover, she was unconnected with any of the great
vested interests which constituted the great stumbling block in the
way of any Bill. There is a telegram extant addressed to her by the
President of the Edinburgh College of Physicians who had gone up to
London to watch the debate,—“Please wire Mr. Stansfeld to be sure to
be here in time to secure dropping of bill proposed.”

Towards the end of 1884, the Edinburgh Extra-Mural School made an
effort towards incorporation, and memorialized the Privy Council to
grant them a Charter. S. J.-B. was anxious to take advantage of this
opportunity to raise again the question of the admission of women to
medical education in Scotland, especially as, by this time, the
various missionary bodies were quite alive to the importance of the
subject.

“The Free Church are also willing to move,” she writes to Mr.
Stansfeld on November 20th, “and they wish to memorialize the Privy
Council direct, and to request that any Charter granted may _not
exclude_ women, but make it at least optional for the College to
admit them. To my intense amusement the request has just come to me
that I will ‘draft’ such a memorial, but I have not the remotest
idea how even to address the Privy Council!”

It was not only the Free Church that asked her help. The lecturers,
mindful of her power of enlisting the sympathy of statesmen in the
past, also begged her to use her influence in high quarters, and,
through the National Association, to present a petition to the Privy
Council. Mr. Stansfeld was helpful as ever, advising her to
interview Lord Carlingford, from whom she had a gracious reception.
“But the primary condition must be,” she writes to Dr. Littlejohn,
“that the Charter distinctly commits the College to the admission of
women on equal terms. If this is not approved, the whole thing falls
to the ground.”

The reader of the foregoing chapters might not unnaturally be
prepared to hear that the College was duly incorporated, and that
the women were left in the lurch; but it was the unexpected that
happened. The effort of the Extra-Mural School to achieve
incorporation failed, but the examining bodies for which the School
existed, the Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, decided a few
months later to admit women. We may reasonably suppose that the
renewed discussion of the whole question had not been in vain, but,
so far as S. J.-B. was concerned, it was a case of the seed cast
into the ground, which springs and grows up “he knoweth not how.” On
March 17th, 1885, she writes to Dr. Pechey:

  “Meanwhile I have two splendid pieces of news to send you, if they
  have not yet reached you,—viz. (1) The Irish College of Surgeons
  has not only opened all its examinations, and even its
  fellowships, to women, but also all the classes in its School,—
  making separate arrangements for Practical Anatomy only. (2) More
  wonderful still, the Scottish Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons
  of Edinburgh and Glasgow (now combined to give one ‘Triple
  Qualification’) have decided _without a division_ to throw open
  all their examinations to women. I am exceedingly surprised, for
  though I heard an application had been made, I thought there was
  little hope of success, and took no trouble about it. However, so
  it is, and I hope to have classes opened in the Extra-Mural School
  (and perhaps in connection with St. Andrews) next winter. Somebody
  has left St. Andrews (subject to a life interest) a legacy of
  £50,000 on condition of admitting women. So you see all round
  ‘Pigs is looking up.’

  Mrs. Russel was here for a few days a fortnight ago, and is as
  nice as ever.”

This great advance gave a fresh impetus and point to the publication
of _Medical Women_,[151] which was duly achieved a few months later.
It called forth a great sheaf of congratulatory letters from those
who remembered the old days.

Footnote 151:

  _Medical Women_, by Sophia Jex-Blake, M.D. Oliphant, Anderson &
  Ferrier. The book has long been out of print, but, as a storehouse
  of facts, it is largely drawn upon by all writers on the subject,
  including the author of the present volume.

  “Of course,” wrote Dr. King Chambers, “future generations will
  think it necessary to season your arguments with the traditionary
  grain of salt; but the facts are so clearly and calmly stated that
  they will be accepted absolutely. As to the character of the
  movement itself, the future must give it.”

  “I am glad I was always a steady, if humble, adherent to the side
  of justice before its cause was popular,” wrote Professor
  Charteris. “I hope that you will long and increasingly enjoy the
  position that you had such a hard fight to win. You got all the
  buffets for many a day.”

And Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell:

  “I am sorry that we have lost you from London. We much need that
  combination of unselfish activity and wise combination of
  practical qualities which we find in no other of the leaders of
  the movement.”

  “What a change,” says Dr. Heron Watson, “has come over the spirit
  of the Medical Corporation since the story of your efforts in the
  cause first appeared.”

And this—finally—is from a generous letter from the Revd. William
Pechey:

  “If Edith is entitled to the praise of having borne, as you say,
  ‘an excellent part’ in the movement you narrate, she would, I am
  sure, be the first to join me in saying that you alone can fairly
  say: ‘_Quorum maxima pars fui._’”

But the mention of Dr. Pechey’s name reminds one of a delightful
letter she forwarded from her little friend Rukhmabai (now Dr.
Rukhmabai) who, needless to say, was _not_ one of those who
remembered the old days.

                                                “Girgaum,
                                                   “23rd June, 1886.

  MY DEAR MISS PECHEY,

        I herewith return ... one of your books (The Roman Singer),
  with many thanks. I looked it all over just enough to know the
  purport of the story, which I found contains nothing but mere
  _love_ matters.

  I shall return the other book (Medical Women) in a few days. It is
  so very interesting to me that I don’t like to drop a single word
  of it while reading. It gives me a great comfort as I see the
  _truth_ won the victory at last, though you had to suffer so much
  even in a country like Europe. I would never have believed if some
  common person were to tell me, that the people there were so
  against to allow women to study medicine....

                                   Yours affectionately,
                                                         RUKHMABAI.”

S. J.-B. was interested too at this time in the development of a
volume for the publication of which she had been responsible in the
first instance,—that most useful gazetteer, _The Englishwoman’s Year
Book_,—the success of which has unhappily never been comparable to
its merits: and she continued to advise and help the first editor,
her friend, Miss Louisa Hubbard.

In 1886 she was asked to deliver one of a series of Health Lectures
in Edinburgh, and of course she consented gladly,—her special
lecture being addressed to women only. The lectures were free, and
the lecturers unpaid.

When arrangements were far advanced, she found that the Committee
proposed to charge one shilling for admittance to her lecture, and
she promptly rebelled. She wanted all her Dispensary patients and
all their friends to come and hear what she had to say, and the
charge seemed to her to do away with more than half the good of her
lecture. It was represented to her that a charge was also to be made
for the corresponding lecture to men only, but she did not consider
the cases identical. In any case the men’s lecture was no affair of
her’s.

Mrs. Trayner (afterwards Lady Trayner) was an important person on
that committee, and she and Lord Trayner had a great respect and
cordial regard for S. J.-B. They understood her, and they wanted
other people to understand her too. They were most anxious that she
should waive her objection to the shilling charge, partly and
especially because she was coöperating in the matter of the Health
Lectures with men doctors, and they—the Trayners—wanted her to show
herself gracious and conciliatory.

S. J.-B.’s reply to Mrs. Trayner’s letter is characteristic of her
attitude at that time:

  “Pray thank Lord Trayner warmly for his kind interest in me and
  the medical women generally. I think, however, that he somewhat
  over-estimates the importance of what the men doctors may think
  one way or the other. You and he will remember that all that we
  have gained has been gained in the teeth of nearly all of them,
  and if they have failed to hinder me hitherto, they are certainly
  powerless to hurt me now.... I am willing enough to shake hands
  with them if they wish it, but you must remember that it is I and
  not they who have the old sores to forgive....

  I am sure you will understand that I say this merely because I
  want you to understand that my position is probably one of the
  most independent in Edinburgh,—I want nothing from anybody and I
  fear nothing from anybody. I mean to do in this, and larger
  matters, what seems to me right, to the best of my lights, and I
  have long ago learned while doing so to leave consequences to take
  care of themselves.

  With hearty thanks for your kindness, believe me,

                                     Yours very truly,
                                                       S. JEX-BLAKE.

  Pray excuse this hasty line, written at the end of a long day’s
  work.”

If this seems written in an ungracious and reprehensible spirit, the
reader must bear in mind the fire the writer had come through. And
after all what is it but a somewhat pagan rendering of St. Paul’s
“From henceforth let no man trouble me....”

In any case the Trayners were not of the kind to take offence. Their
interest in S. J.-B. and her work remained unbroken. Lady Trayner
visited the Dispensary more than once and took on as a regular
pensioner a brave old patient with a disfigured face, who appealed
to her sympathies more than most.

The lecture was free, and proved a great success.

  “You will like to know,” writes S. J.-B. to Miss Irby, “that my
  lecture went off very well, the hall (which holds nearly 2000) was
  crammed to the doors and stairways, and I lectured from slight
  notes, much better, Ursula says, than if I had read a lecture.

  I have already had 4 new patients in consequence.”

It now remained for women to avail themselves _de facto_ of their
admission _de jure_ to the Royal Colleges. “I trust,” wrote S. J.-B.
in a letter to the _Times_, announcing the fresh step gained, “I
trust that classes will now within a few months be re-opened in
Edinburgh. With a view to definite arrangements for the ensuing
winter session, I shall be very glad to receive the names of any
ladies desiring to study in Scotland.” A few days later she wrote to
the secretary of the Extra-Mural School, who happened to be an old
ally.

                                               “Bruntsfield Lodge,
                                                   March 17. [1886].

  DEAR DR. MACADAM,

        I have already had nearly a dozen letters from ladies
  wishing to study Medicine in Scotland, so it is clear that the
  demand is real and considerable.

  Can you give me any printed statement about the classes, etc., in
  the Extra Mural School?... Of course I know that if separate
  classes were required much greater expense must be involved, but I
  sincerely hope that most of the lecturers may be willing to admit
  women in the ordinary way. If so, I believe that a considerable
  number would join the classes next winter. If you would kindly let
  me have a list of the Lecturers, and would tell me when the next
  meeting is to be, I might (if you thought it desirable) see some
  of them before the meeting. I wish very much that the matter could
  be favourably decided next month, as this would give us time to
  make arrangements, and get up a good class, etc.

  Would it not be well for you before the meeting to get an official
  letter from the Registrar of the Irish College of Surgeons stating
  that women are admitted to all the ordinary classes (except
  Practical Anatomy) at Dublin?

  To turn to another subject,—can you tell me the chemical nature of
  the fluid contained in “Fire-Extinguishing Grenades,” etc. Are
  they really reliable?

                                Yours very truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

It is clear from this that she had not the smallest intention nor
wish to found a separate School of Medicine for Women; but her hopes
as regarded the lecturers were doomed to disappointment. On the
whole they showed themselves enlightened and helpful, but they
declined to admit women to their ordinary classes.

They were quite willing—some of them—to lecture to women separately,
but one could not expect first-rate men in rising practice to devote
an hour or more of precious time daily without more adequate
remuneration than the fees of the first handful of women students
were likely to represent. There must, of course, be a sufficient
guarantee to make the undertaking worth their while, and the
students were assuredly not in a position to provide that guarantee;
so S. J.-B. made herself responsible for it at once.

For the first year the women attended separate lectures at one of
the men’s schools, but it soon became obvious that separate
premises, in which students could study and dissect, and change
their dress, and generally make themselves at home, were, if not
absolutely necessary, at least highly desirable.

Now it happened that, in the days of the old struggle, in a moment
perhaps when hope ran high, S. J.-B., Miss Louisa Stevenson and Miss
Du Pre had bought the famous old premises in Surgeon Square, which
had been a medical school for generations. Here Robert Knox had
lectured to his students, and the place had thrilling and sinister
associations with Burke and Hare. When all hope of education in
Edinburgh seemed finally blighted, these premises had been let to
various tenants, but S. J.-B. had never lost sight of the
possibility that they might some day be used again for their
original purpose.

So now the old place was repaired and cleaned and painted and
heated,—under the personal supervision of S. J.-B. and one or two
friends, at small cost as regards money, but with lavish expenditure
of brains and good will.

It was necessary, too, that hospital instruction should be provided,
and to this end, S. J.-B. approached the authorities at Leith.

  “The very large number of students at the Edinburgh Infirmary,”
  she wrote to Dr. Struthers, “make it almost impossible that women
  should there get opportunities of study, and (as there is no other
  suitable hospital of sufficient size in Edinburgh) I am anxious to
  ascertain whether the Directors of the Leith Hospital would
  entertain the idea of admitting them to opportunities of clinical
  study in their wards.

  If so, I should be glad to make any arrangement as to fees that
  may be desired by the Directors; or if they preferred it would at
  once guarantee fees to the amount of 200 guineas yearly.”

Her application was warmly supported by Mr. R. Somerville, and
others of the Directors, and after a long series of letters and
interviews, the negotiation was completed.

  “Every night I am quite as tired as is safe,” she wrote to Miss
  Irby, who had begged for a postcard, “and yet every day I have to
  omit half a dozen things that cry out to be done. However I _do
  not mean_ to break down again, so I simply do what I can and leave
  the rest.”

Little by little the School became more of a corporate thing. A
resident secretary was necessary, of course, so S. J.-B. hit on a
likely person[152] and trained her. Caretakers (man and wife) were
found to look after the premises. A library was provided, and, as
soon as might be, anatomical and Materia Medica museums. No one who
has not lived through the founding of a medical school can form the
faintest idea how much it means. S. J.-B. had been over the ground
before, and may be supposed to have realized what she was
undertaking.

Footnote 152:

  S. J.-B. never had a more loyal and devoted helper than the first
  secretary of the School, Miss Janet Black.

She had Dr. Balfour’s help from the first, and a tower of strength
he proved: by degrees a committee was formed: but from first to last
the responsibility rested to all intents and purposes on her
shoulders.

The position, too, on which the whole thing rested was curious. The
School was not recognized as such. Each lecturer was recognized
individually. At any moment any lecturer in the Extra-Mural School
was free to open a rival class and cut the ground from under S. J.-
B.’s feet.

The new venture, moreover, had all the disadvantages inherent in a
new creation. It had no senior students, none even, at first, who
had gone through the wholesome discipline of the modern High School:
it had no tradition. By the sheer necessities of the case, S. J.-B.
was compelled to be senior student,—to be tradition.

For ten or more years the School did excellent work, but the
instability of its foundation proved too great. Whether the “lion-
hearted”[153] pioneer, with her extraordinary bent for arranging
detail, could in any case have made a success of the venture, under
such difficult conditions, when the heroic days of initiation were
over, it is impossible to say. The reader will not need to be told—
S. J.-B.’s bitterest opponent never denied—that she put into the
venture infinitely more labour and sympathy and affection and brains
than she need have done,—and there were those among the students who
came near to appreciating these qualities as they deserved. But of
course there were others—as at Mannheim of old—with whom a cheaper
personality would better have served the turn.

Footnote 153:

  The adjective is applied to her by Charles Reade in _The Woman
  Hater_.

For a year or two everyone was happy and contented, and then the
crash of temperaments came. There is no need to tell the story in
detail. Some of those concerned were young, and some were foolish,
and there are some concerning whom one’s lips are sealed. The
original difficulty was complicated by side issues that never could
be fully threshed out. The actual story seems interminable, and
sometimes insignificant enough, but the principle underlying it is
of the real essence of tragedy. Enough to say that at the end of a
year or two, S. J.-B. found herself confronted with a form of
opposition which no one in authority would cheerfully have gone to
meet,—a form of opposition peculiarly trying to one of her
temperament. Supreme tact might have weathered the storm,—and it
must always be remembered that, on many occasions in life, in this
connection and in others,—she evidenced a tact that was all but
supreme. In any case she failed here. Opposition classes were
started in due course on a cheaper basis, classes in which the
central controlling power was purely nominal. There was endless
propaganda; some sort of organization was got together: everybody
who had a grudge against S. J.-B. remembered it now; her faults,
mistakes and deficiencies—particularly her want of enthusiasm for
missions—came back relentlessly upon her head: and she found herself
(as Thring has said of “every consistent worker on principle”), “put
in the position of opposing what she had always worked for, and her
opponents posing as the workers.” Professor Masson and Miss Louisa
Stevenson, both of whom had considered the founding of a Scottish
School at this moment premature, wrote to her in grim amusement at
some of the names which now appeared in support of the cause.

Let it be conceded for all the concession is worth, that in a sense
S. J.-B. brought the difficulty upon herself. Once again something
was required of her which a smaller person could have given, but
which she could not give. The tragic element lay in this that she
never saw where she was at fault. She was conscious of an honest
purpose and of unwearying unselfish endeavour. What more could one
ask? So many people succeed who give much less than this! She even
yielded on a good many points—when yielding was too late.

What strikes one most on looking back is the extraordinary loyalty
with which most of the students rallied round her when the split
came.

When one of the lecturers (who had striven, like so many others,
to make “even a slight alteration” in her) congratulated her on
the “brains” she had retained in the School, she responded
characteristically:

“_And_ the heart.”

“And the heart,” he agreed.

Some of the lecturers were even finer. “The terms you name are quite
satisfactory,” wrote Dr. Aitken when things were at quite their
worst, and S. J.-B. could no longer guarantee an adequate emolument.
“I would take your students without fee of any kind before I would
see you beat, so you need not let the matter give you any concern.”

And Dr. (now Professor) A. J. Thomson, when he heard she was leaving
Edinburgh, wrote:

  “I have always felt, if I may dare to say so, that your part has
  been like that of a general who won a great battle and then rode
  away, leaving the achievement with the ungrateful. Happily you
  know how many of us are neither ungrateful nor ignorant.”

But finest of all was the effect on S. J.-B. herself. She fought on,
of course,—that was in the nature of her,—and loyal supporters were
many;[154] but, although the long struggle to keep the better School
going,—to get it improved, endowed, affiliated to the University of
St. Andrews,—absolutely wore her out, she never became embittered
and she never really lost her buoyancy. When Queen Margaret College
opened a medical side in 1890, one might have thought it was the
last straw, especially as it meant the removal of eight of her
students whose homes were in or near Glasgow, but in this case her
loss meant the progress of the cause, and she rejoiced in it
wholeheartedly. It was delightful to see the happy terms on which
she and Miss Galloway worked in sympathy until and beyond the final
closing of the Edinburgh School.

Footnote 154:

  The Marquis of Bute and Sir Colin Scott Moncrieff (Under Secretary
  for Scotland) are among the best-known names in the company of
  those who did their best to help her.

So she always retained her gallant front. If she thought sometimes
of “that weary School” she never spoke so: she always saw in it the
ideal of what it was going to be. Success was always just round the
corner so to speak, all but within reach; but success, in the form
in which she looked for it, never came.

Success there was, of course, “not its semblance, but itself.”
Honest work always means success. The brief life of that School was
the seed-time of much fine work that would otherwise never have been
done. Its students have acquitted themselves nobly in many parts of
the world. And on the principle that “he who watereth shall himself
be watered,” it did much for S. J.-B. It gave her a little band of
juniors who in some measure understood her, who responded to her
ideals, who were proud to assist her and to reckon themselves her
disciples. The interest she took in them individually was amazing.
No trouble was too great that would forward their interests in any
way. As the years went on, she seemed to forget herself altogether
in their successes. She lived anew in their lives. Her whole nature
grew and mellowed, though it could not change. And one is glad to
record that never again to the end of life did she suffer the weeks
and months of loneliness that had darkened the early days of her
professional career.




                               CHAPTER V
              RE-OPENING OF EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY TO WOMEN


It seemed better in the previous chapter to explain at once that,
after a brief run of prosperity, the history of the Edinburgh School
of Medicine for Women was chequered by a long fight against heavy
odds; but no one who visited the stirring bee-hive at Surgeon Square
would have guessed at the struggle that underlay its cheerful
aspect. And, fortunately, there were many strands in S. J.-B.’s life
besides the struggle for her School. In a doctor’s experience there
must always be much to interest and cheer, and S. J.-B.’s range was
wider than that of the ordinary doctor. Editors were no less glad of
her work than of old. In the autumn of 1887, she wrote to the Editor
of the _Nineteenth Century_, offering him a paper on Medical Women
which should supplement the one contributed by Mr. Stansfeld ten
years before. Mr. Knowles replied immediately that he would be
delighted to receive such a paper from her, and “the sooner the
better.” The article duly appeared in November of that year.

At her little hospital she had a series of residents, some from the
London School and some from her own, whom one can fairly describe as
picked women,—keen and competent and loyal; and she enjoyed and
appreciated these as they deserved. More and more, too, people
sought her opinion and advice on every subject of real human
interest. One doctor—a complete stranger—even wrote from far wilds
to ask whether there was any lady studying in her School who she
thought was likely to make him a suitable wife. He was coming home,
but his leave was short, and he would be glad if she would save time
by paving the way for him as far as possible. I am afraid the
students never even heard of this opportunity!

How far she was from discouraging a true marriage may be gathered
from the following letter to one of her former residents for whom
she had designs in the way of more ambitious work, and who wrote in
some trepidation to confess that she was engaged to be married:

                                                      “May 30, 1895.

  DEAR MISS ——,

        I was very glad to get your letter of March 10th, and very
  much interested in all your news. I may set your mind at rest by
  saying at once that I am not going to scold you about your
  engagement. I hold most strongly that ‘Love should still be Lord
  of all,’ and that if two good people love each other heartily in
  the right way, they ought to marry under almost all circumstances.
  I don’t believe in vows of celibacy for medical women any more
  than for any one else. Women are women before they are doctors.

  At the same time I am afraid you are rather sanguine in hoping
  that you will be of more use in your profession married than
  single. It is not the husbands that are the obstacles to practice,
  but the babies. If a woman becomes a mother, I certainly think
  nothing outside her home can have, or ought to have, so much claim
  upon her as her children.

  However I think it constantly happens that we plan out one kind of
  life for ourselves, and then that another is shaped out for us,
  and we must believe, if we believe in a God at all, that the
  wisdom that decides for us is greater than our own.

  So long as we act up to our highest light, I think we need not
  trouble ourselves about results....

  With all good wishes, believe me,

                                     Yours sincerely,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

That this was no new attitude on her part we learn from a letter
written many years before to Miss Bertha Cordery. “You are quite
right in thinking that I do not by any means as a matter of course
congratulate people on their marriage, but when you say that ‘having
met, no other result was possible,’ I think you express the essence
of a good marriage with the terseness worthy of the distinguished
historian.[155]”

Footnote 155:

  The “distinguished historian” of course refers to Miss Cordery
  herself.

This seems the best place to say one word about the special interest
S. J.-B. took in her Hindu students. The first of these, Annie
Jagannadham, was a young woman of such fine and finished character
that her early death, soon after her return to her native land, was
a matter for infinite regret, but scarcely for surprise. When she
qualified as a doctor, S. J.-B. wrote to the _Spectator_ to point
out the desirability of sending back Hindu women educated in England
to minister to their own countrywomen; and her letter called forth a
gratifying response from Mr. James Cropper of Ellergreen (who had
been interested in S. J.-B.’s first application to the University of
Edinburgh many years before) offering to found a scholarship for
Hindu women at her school. This was accordingly done, and a series
of Hindu students was the result. Differing from each other in many
respects, they were alike in one thing, and that was a real gift for
understanding and appreciating their Dean. They seemed to find the
Mother side of her by a sort of instinct.

  “I cannot tell you,” wrote one who had failed in an examination
  abroad, “how much your kind letter comforted me. When I was happy
  I wrote to other people; but when I was in distress I wrote to you
  and was soothed, for failure did not seem so hard when you were
  satisfied with my work.”

When Rukhmabai came to Edinburgh for her Final Professional
Examination, she was S. J.-B.’s guest, and a strong mutual
admiration and friendship was the result.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In accepting the chairmanship of the School, Dr. Balfour had made it
almost a stipulation that S. J.-B. should personally undertake the
teaching of Midwifery, and, in consequence of this, she was the
first woman to be recognized as a lecturer in the Extra-Mural
School. As a matter of fact, her special technical training was
necessarily out of date. Dr. Balfour probably looked upon Midwifery
mainly as a subject that successful physicians leave behind them,
and did not realize that greater strides had been made in the
teaching of this subject than in any other. However, S. J.-B. was a
born teacher, as we know: she worked hard: and she had the able
coöperation of the late Dr. Milne Murray, whose attitude towards her
in this connection was one more of the splendid loyalties bound up
in the story of her life.

And one cannot talk of loyalty without recalling a characteristic
letter from Dr. Pechey, written when she received the news of S. J.-
B.’s appointment:

                         “Hip Hip Hooray!!
                         Hip Hip Hooray!!!
                         Hip Hip Hooray!!!!!

  In the very place where we were stoned and beaten 18 years ago.
  Well, I am glad to have lived to see the day. Just when your paper
  came, I was feeling life a burden.

  Do you think they would let me lecture on something—Shakespeare or
  the musical glasses—when I come home _if_ ever I do. When you want
  an assistant let me know.

  I don’t know when I have felt so pleased and elated and especially
  that it should happen to _you_, it is so appropriate. Isn’t Mrs.
  Thorne very pleased and everybody else?...

  Dear Sophy, I _am_ so pleased, more than if some one had left me a
  million of money, though I do have to look hard at every anna now
  before letting it go!”

  “Thanks for your very hearty congratulations,” S. J.-B. wrote in
  reply,—“... Selfishly, I regret it very much, for I have no idea
  how to find either the time or the strength (or knowledge) for the
  course, but I suppose I must just do the best I can.

  Of course if you were here you could have the pick of the
  lecturerships in the School, and after one precedent, they
  couldn’t refuse to recognize you: but the pay would hardly keep
  your Highness in hairpins.”

The idea of having her old friend in Edinburgh dwelt in her mind
nevertheless, and some time later—in May 1890—she wrote:

  “By the bye if you do decide to leave India next year, and if it
  could possibly be made to fit in with Mr. Phipson’s plans,[156] I
  wish with all my heart that you could see your way to come and
  settle in Edinburgh, and take up with your splendid energy the
  very wide field in Scotland that is almost ripe to harvest. My
  strength is about spent, and besides you have elements of social
  success that I never should have. You are far more of a woman of
  the world and a far more able diplomatist. My Hospital will never
  develop in my tired hands, but I believe you might make a splendid
  thing of it; and at the same time I believe you would have a
  capital west-end practice almost immediately, and of course a
  lectureship if you cared to have it. Think this idea over
  thoroughly before you decide against it.

                                    Yours sincerely,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

Footnote 156:

  Dr. Edith Pechey had married Mr. H. M. Phipson of Bombay.

The feeling that her time of work was drawing to an end was
intensified by the news of the death of her friend, Dr. Lucy Sewall.
This was the last heavy bereavement she had to face, and she took it
hard. To her friend, Mrs. Brander, her “eldest daughter,” she had
written a month or two before the above correspondence with Dr.
Pechey:

                                                     “Feb. 27. 1890.

  DEAREST BEL,

        For the second time I have to send you terribly bad news. My
  dear friend, Dr. Sewall, has been as you know in bad health for
  the last 4 or 5 years, and last month she was seized with a very
  severe attack of bronchitis, from which she never regained
  strength, and she passed away ‘very peacefully’ on Feb. 13th.

  Though I have seen so little of her for some years back, it is a
  great blow to me,—the greatest I have felt since 1881.

  _How_ I hope that she is again with the mother and father she
  loved so very dearly. Indeed she has never really rallied, I
  believe, from her father’s death (at 90) a year ago.

  A whiter sweeter soul never lived, and her memory ‘smells sweet
  and blossoms in the dust.’

  I cannot write more today, but I could not let you hear it from
  anyone else.

  I hope you got the little book I sent you at Christmas. I could
  not write but it carried much affection to you.

                                    Yours affectionately,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

For the _Englishwoman’s Review_ she wrote an account of this “strong
and gentle soul,” quoting the lines Whittier had written about her
ancestor. “I enclose the whole verse about Judge Sewall,” she says
to the Editor, “in case you have room for it. It might almost word
for word have been written of his far-away descendant.

             ‘Walks the Judge of the Great Assize,
             Samuel Sewall, the good and wise.
             His face with lines of firmness wrought,
             He wears the look of a man unbought,
             Who swears to his hurt and changes not;
             Yet touched and softened nevertheless
             With the grace of Christian gentleness,
             The face that a child would climb to kiss!
             True and tender and brave and just,
             That man might honour and woman trust.’”

S. J.-B.’s hands might be tired, but the eye on the bridge was as
keen as ever. She had been aiming from the first at some sort of
reinforcement from St. Andrews, and in 1888 Lord Lothian’s Bill had
seemed to open a new door of hope.

                                                  “May 10th. [1888.]

  DEAR MR. STANSFELD,

        The Bill of which I wrote is the ‘Universities (Scotland)
  Bill,’ which has been introduced in the House of Lords by Lord
  Lothian. I believe it has not yet come down to your House, but I
  am very anxious, when it does so, that attention should be
  directed to the clauses about women and about ‘affiliation of
  Colleges,’ which latter might solve our problem, e.g. if our
  Edinburgh School were affiliated to St. Andrews.

  I shall be most grateful if you will talk about it beforehand with
  members likely to be interested, and if possible speak on it also.

                             Yours always gratefully,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

The previous day she had written,

                                                           “May 9th.

  DEAR LORD ABERDARE,

        I am extremely obliged for your very kind letter, and shall
  be _most_ grateful if you can make Lord Lothian’s acquaintance,
  interest him in our subject, and introduce me to him. I am very
  anxious to secure his favourable attention, and that of the
  Commission, and I am sure that your introduction would give me the
  best possible chance. I am most anxious not to lose the present
  opportunity to bring our needs to the front.

                         With renewed thanks,
                                   Yours very truly,
                                                      S. JEX-BLAKE.”

When the Bill was passed and Commissioners appointed, she laid
before them a memorial in support of the desired aims, and in June
1891 she was summoned to give evidence in person. On June 28th she
wrote to Miss Du Pre:

  “I had to appear before the University Commissioners last
  Wednesday, and if possible I will send you a proof of my
  examination. It was very satisfactory, as the Chairman (Lord
  Kinnear) said they were satisfied that it was desirable and
  necessary to give medical degrees to women in Scotland.”

To another friend she had written a week earlier,

  “By the bye you will like to see the enclosed proof of my evidence
  last week before the Universities Commission. Miss E.-L. made me
  tell my class about it next day, and they clapped warmly; and
  then, after the lecture, as I was going out, they gave me another
  round. I stopped and said,—‘Oh, is that for Univ. Commission?’
  ‘For _you_, Doctor!’ shouted Miss Moorhead.”

The whole matter, as is usual with such things, ran a leisurely
course, for on April 27th, 1892, she writes again,

  “... I had one very amusing experience on Monday. The Scottish
  Universities Commission has been issuing some ‘Ordinances’ to
  which serious objections are taken, and among others a flaw has
  been found in the Women’s Ordinance, which we want to have
  remedied. All the objecting bodies were to meet together, so Dr.
  Balfour and I were summoned by enclosed solemn document to appear
  to represent our School, and it _was_ amusing to find myself an
  invited delegate, at whose entrance the Chairman rose and came
  forward with outstretched hand, in the awful University Court
  Room, where our case had over and over again been tried by a
  hostile authority, and lost, without an opportunity for a word in
  our own defence.

  Sir Robert Christison looked down from the wall, and it made me
  almost chuckle to think what _he_ would have said!

  Sic transit! _How_ the world moves!

  I have just heard this morning of a legacy of £100 for our
  Hospital, and probably something for the School though (from vague
  wording) that is less certain.”

At this time the great hope—as so often in the past—lay in the
direction of the University of St. Andrews, but the hope proved
illusory once more. In reading the history, one feels again and
again as if St. Andrews University had been surrounded by some
strange magic circle, for it happened on numberless occasions that
when everything seemed settled, and every difficulty had been
laboriously overcome, some unsuspected link in the chain gave way,
and endless exertion was rendered null and void. So it seems to have
happened now, for in June 1894 we find S. J.-B. writing again to
Miss Du Pre:

  “I have been desperately busy this week, chiefly at the University
  or with University people, as circumstances have led to my very
  suddenly applying to have our School recognized by the [Edinburgh]
  University Court, which really seems possible, Calderwood and
  Watson both being members of it. The story is a long one, arising
  out of complications at St. Andrews.

  I enclose a copy of my Memorial,—please return it. It comes up
  tomorrow before the Court.

  Watson said so very kindly that he hoped it would pass, if only
  that I might have rest from my long labours,—wasn’t it sweet of
  him? A quarter of a century _is_ a long time!”

So the old warrior gathered herself together once more and made a
last appeal to the University Court of her own Alma Mater to grant
to other women the privilege that could never now be her own. She
reminded them that in 1869 the same Court had conceded the principle
of admitting women to graduation in medicine, that that principle
had never been disallowed by them, and that the problem of its
practical accomplishment had been under the consideration of the
Court ever since.

It cannot be said that hope ran high even now. It had always been a
saying among Scottish students that Edinburgh would be the last
stronghold to yield; but the tide everywhere was on the turn. After
full consideration of the subject, the Court rose nobly to the
spirit of the resolution passed by their predecessors in 1869, and
in October 1894 made public their determination to admit women
forthwith to graduation in medicine.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The National Association for Promoting the Medical Education of
Women, which had done such excellent service after its foundation in
1871, had for some years ceased to exist; “At the present time many
of its members had passed away, and others were widely scattered,
but it seemed desirable to those women who had always been members
of it, and who were still resident in Edinburgh, that some
congratulation should be offered by them to Dr. Jex-Blake, for the
great victory that had been achieved by her in the opening of the
degrees of the University of Edinburgh to women after a struggle
extending over exactly five-and-twenty years.”[157] So on Saturday,
November 3rd, 1894, these honourable women met together and
presented the following address:

  “We, the undersigned, women members of the original National
  Association for the Medical Education of Women, resident at this
  time in Edinburgh, desire to offer to you our warm and hearty
  congratulations on the brilliant success you have achieved in
  securing the opening of the Edinburgh University medical
  examinations and degrees to women students. We know that it was
  largely due to your great ability and knowledge that the enabling
  Bill of 1876 was passed, which put it into the power, if they so
  willed, of each of the nineteen examining bodies of the United
  Kingdom to admit women to qualifying examinations, and which was
  the foundation of the success on which we congratulate you to-day.
  Many who worked with and under you in the old days have passed
  away. We who are left take this opportunity of expressing to you
  our appreciation of the great sacrifice you have made of time, and
  strength, and money, to win for younger women in their own country
  a complete medical education crowned by a degree. To have done
  this in Edinburgh we regard as a success of which you may be
  justly proud. (_Signed_)—Elizabeth Pease Nichol, Anne H.
  Calderwood, Grant A. Millar, Flora C. Stevenson, Phœbe Blyth,
  Sarah E. Siddons Mair, Emily Hodgson, Charlotte Geddes, Agnes
  Craig, Anne B. Foster, Hannah Lorimer, M. G. Paton, Priscilla
  Bright M‘Laren, Elizabeth Stuart Blackie, Elisa Carlile Stevenson,
  Mina Kunz, C. M. Charteris, Margaret Wyld, Eliza Wigham, Jessie M.
  Wellstood, Euphemia Millar, Eliza Scott Kirkland, Maggie A. Rose,
  Augusta G. Wyld, Helen Brown, A. A. Skelton, C. M. Edington, A.
  Edington, Amelia R. Hill, Mary Burton, Louisa Stevenson.—_9th
  October, 1894._”

Footnote 157:

  The quotation is from Miss Louisa Stevenson’s speech in presenting
  the address.

Before leaving the subject of S. J.-B.’s active life in Edinburgh,
it may be well to sum up some of her main characteristics as a
doctor and as a citizen, though to a great extent these have already
become evident.

First, was her great deftness in any kind of manipulation. It was
interesting to see her outshine in this respect so many of the trig
and dainty women who at one time or another, worked under her.

Second, was her readiness in emergency. The grass never grew under
her feet. It is on record that she had finished some minor operation
before her anaesthetist knew that she had begun. An amusing instance
of her readiness occurs in a chance episode with her carriage-
builder. It was not unusual for her to have little rubs with this
man. He and his subordinates had difficulty in living up to her
ideas of punctuality, and no doubt they considered her a bit of a
nuisance.

One day she called to remonstrate about something and found “the
Governor” in great distress from a splinter of steel which had
become imbedded in his eye.

“I’ll take it out for you,” she said, and, turning to the men,
added, “Bring a chair.”

The chair was placed by her direction in the best light obtainable,
_i.e._ on the gallery surrounding the carriage yard, in full view of
the men and horses below. She made the patient sit down, and,
standing behind him, produced a surgical needle from her instrument
case and with its curved convex edge deftly removed the splinter.

It was all done in the twinkling of an eye. Very simple, but very
characteristic.

And it would have been awkward if she had failed.

Third, was her refusal to let a patient die. No doctor wishes to
lose a case, but with S. J.-B. it was a matter of definite personal
struggle.

One day in the comparatively early days of practice, she came in
very late to lunch, having been urgently detained with a private
patient. She was anxious about a case in her little hospital—a
surgical case which had developed medical complications—and she sent
a messenger down for news.

  “Just sinking,” was the pencilled reply from the resident. “Dr. ——
  and Dr. —— [the consultants] have been here, and have given her
  up. We have ceased to worry her with food.”

“_Ceased to worry her with food!_” One saw the summer lightnings on
S. J.-B.’s forehead. “Tell Charles to bring the brougham round
immediately.” Within half an hour the beef-tea was being
administered by her own hand; and there was no more talk of “not
worrying the patient with food.” She was worried until she not only
rallied, but got her foot on to the ladder of a slow and sure
recovery, a recovery that meant just everything to the husband and
children who were anxiously awaiting the mother’s return to the
little home.

As a neighbour and citizen S. J.-B. had certain outstanding
_qualités_, which, with their corresponding _défauts_, have never
tended to make the possessor of them universally popular. She
considered it a public duty to uphold as far as lay in one person’s
power the general standard of proper behaviour and efficiency in the
community. She had no use for sluggards and shirkers. “Here’s the
Doctor,—mind yersel’!” a cabman was heard to say when he and a
gossiping mate had allowed their vehicles to sprawl right across the
highroad just as the familiar pony-chaise came in sight. No postal
service ever deteriorated in her vicinity. If lesser officials
failed to listen, she appealed to the Postmaster-General, and she
accomplished many minor reforms by which her neighbours profited as
much as she did herself. Assuredly she was no grumbler, but she
considered that those who make it their aim to slip smoothly through
life, leaving to others all the irksome work of protesting, are—to
say the least—acting an unheroic part. She agreed that all things
come to him who waits,—and come through the exertions of those who
have not been content merely to wait. The callow upstart official
was apt to fare badly at her hands, but if the official happened to
be an elderly woman at—say—some isolated country post office, one
saw S. J.-B. at her best. She would steer the way gently and
patiently through some simple transaction that seemed involved
enough in those wilds; and, if she was met by a flash of interest
and intelligence, her appreciation was great. “Why we’ll make you
Postmaster-General!” she has been heard to say, leaving a beaming
face behind her as she gathered up the reins and drove away,—a
visitant indeed from another world.




                               CHAPTER VI
                     DRIVING TOURS. ANIMAL FRIENDS




All through the years of work and conflict, S. J.-B. had looked
forward to her “Sabbatical year,” when, with a clear conscience, she
could retire from active life, and share with others the rest and
seclusion she longed for. As early as 1892 she had written to a
cousin in New Zealand about a visit from her brother, who had been
examining at Fettes:

  “Today he is gone south again. His life at Wells must be very
  quiet and restful after the hard work of Rugby.

  I am beginning to think that I must soon wind up my work and rest.
  I have worked about as hard as anybody could for more than thirty
  years, and I think I have almost done my share. There are young
  people coming up now to do the medical work,—we have about 130
  women on the British Register,—in 1865 when I began to work there
  was only _one_!”

Some months later she seems to have written in the same vein to the
old aunt in Norfolk, for Mrs. Gunton replies in a holograph letter
of four beautifully-written pages:

  “You must not talk of being tired with your occupation at
  _present_. Consider what a _chicken_ you are! On the 11th of
  November I was 93.”

How difficult to find any ground of comparison between those two
lives, grown on the same stock, the one of 52 and the other of 93!

                  *       *       *       *       *

The opening of the University degrees to women cleared the ground a
good deal, but there were still three great difficulties in the way
of retirement. The first was the Hospital. S. J.-B. was aware, as
she had written to Dr. Pechey that it “never would develop in her
tired hands,” but before passing it over to her juniors, she was
anxious to use her name and influence for all they were worth in the
way of raising money to constitute a small endowment, and justify
building, or at least a removal to larger premises. “The one thing
that I do long for still,” she wrote, “is to see a thoroughly good
Women’s Hospital officered by women established in Edinburgh.”

On the whole it was hard work. She wrote many letters in vain, but,
little by little, she gathered a few thousands: and there were, as
usual, some pleasant surprises by the way. Her old friend, Mrs.
Arthur, when asked for £100, promptly responded with a cheque for
£500, and some of those who gave little gave with a few words of
gratitude and appreciation that lifted the gift quite out of the
region of shillings and pounds.

A greater obstacle, perhaps, than the Hospital was the sheer
difficulty of winding up and getting away. S. J.-B. had begun life
as an early Victorian girl with an exceptionally strong hereditary
tendency to store and treasure all sorts of things great and small.
Almost in the twinkling of an eye she became a modern woman with a
correspondence that ran to dozens—sometimes hundreds—of letters in a
day,—a modern woman with no leisure at all for the always
distasteful work of weeding out and destroying. She was always
giving, but she never seemed to give away the things of which she
would be well rid. Moreover she always did things on a massive,
great-spirited scale. If a number of copies of any document were
wanted, it was better to get it printed,—and, if you were getting it
printed, it was safer and cheaper to get 500 or 1000 copies while
the type was up. You never knew how important that particular
document might become. If any article was nearly worn out, buy a new
one by all means,—but keep the old one too in case the new one
should break down.

And so it came about that in her roomy old house, with its spacious
attics and cellars, things were stored and stacked and forgotten
until their volume was almost incredible to those who had not seen
it.

And finally there was the great question where to settle. She never
lost her love for Edinburgh, and she was often tempted to choose a
house on the outskirts. On the other hand, she had always dreamed of
growing figs and peaches on a sunny south wall in her beloved native
county of Sussex: and how was she to find just the right house in
Sussex? So the time slipped away, and she had one illness after
another, and it often seemed to those nearest her as if the
Sabbatical year would be spent on the other Side of the River.

She took holidays more and more frequently, however, and rejoiced
increasingly in the work of those who took her place. “My
daughters,” “my girls,” “my young doctors,”—how proudly she used to
say it! Her face the day five of them were “capped” at the
University was a thing to be seen. And if she was an absolutely un-
self-sparing worker, she knew better than most how to make holiday;
indeed her holidays were as characteristic as everything else she
did and was. She hated publicity, hated the noise and bustle of
trains, so a driving-tour was her ideal of happiness and
refreshment. Her chaise had been specially built for the purpose,
with space in front of the dash-board to accommodate two small
valises, abundant room under the seats, and other incidental
conveniences that one only discovered by degrees. Little by little
she had made a fine art of her preparations. The list of compact
necessaries was always at hand, and the so-called “work-box” alone
contained in a condensed form resources for emergencies of all
descriptions. The groom had his own kit behind, and woe betide him
if his tools were not at hand when a shoe came loose or a nut needed
screwing up.

The strain of packing was apt to be considerable for everyone
concerned, and it lasted for the first mile or two of the journey.
Then gradually it melted away. She would draw a deep breath and give
herself up to the delightful sense of freedom. “Oh, isn’t it good to
be away!” “It seemed yesterday as if we never should get off.”

She always elected to go for the first night or two, if possible, to
an inn she knew. She asked so little, but it had to be just the
particular little that she wanted. No “much” could take the place of
that.

“Thank you, that is very nice,” she would say breezily, after
surveying the rooms in some unknown inn where she hoped to stay for
more than a night. “Now will you open the windows, and give us both
some more towels and one or two little tables, and take away the
ornaments in the sitting-room. We want room for our books.”

Sometimes the people were aghast, but much, much more often they
entered into the spirit of the thing and gave her just what she
wanted. She had a great knack of carrying them with her. She was so
easy-going in most ways, “because of course,” as she used to
explain, “one is not responsible for inn servants as one is for
one’s own.” And some few inns became to her a real haven of refuge,—
Rumbling Bridge, under old Mrs. Macara; Fortingal, in the old days,
under Mr. and Mrs. Menzies; and—above all latterly—(under Mrs.
Beattie), her beloved Gordon Arms at Yarrow where she and Miss Du
Pre had perforce taken refuge one day in a storm, little thinking
what a sanctuary it was often to prove.

  “Yarrow, with all its snows and storms, has answered splendidly
  for both of us,” she writes to Miss Du Pre in April 1896, “and we
  shall return on Saturday much refreshed and strengthened. I have
  been walking a good deal as well as driving. There seems something
  specially restful about this country,—and this inn is as good as
  old Fortingal, in rather a different way.”

The showy inn where one got no real comforts and where the cooking
was bad, was of course the object of her special detestation.

Many times she drove all over Perthshire; she went as far north as
Loch Maree, and, on one occasion at least, she drove all the way
from Brighton to Edinburgh arriving, by the way, to find a patient
on the door-step, and that patient a dowager countess! As a rule the
horse and chaise were put on the train from Carlisle to Rugby.

And the woods and hills seemed the very home of her spirit. More
than anything else they brought the poetry to her lips,—Whittier’s
_My Psalm_ very frequently in later years,—she did so love those
“robes of praise”—and his _Autograph_ too,—

                     “Hater of din and riot,
                     He lived in days unquiet—”

But always most frequently of all, perhaps, Mrs. Browning’s
couplet,—

  “The pulse of dew upon the grass kept his within its number,
  And silent shadows from the trees refreshed him like a slumber.”

Of course there were hardships to be faced too,—as one reckoned
hardships in those days! Often the rain came down in sheets when one
was half way across a shelterless mountain pass; or one drove
unexpectedly into deeper and deeper snow till it even happened that
the groom had to borrow a spade from a neighbouring cottage, and dig
a way out of the drift. Not infrequently night came on before a
suitable inn had been found,—for it is by no means every country inn
that has stabling,—let alone a lock-up coach-house,—and one drove
mile after mile with a tired horse and diminishing hopes.

In all such minor emergencies the indomitable spirit rose to meet
the occasion. One well nigh forgot the ageing woman and saw only the
gallant-hearted boy. She loved driving across a ford, though in some
of the Highland rivers it is highly desirable, if not necessary, to
know the lie of the ground beneath, and to choose just the right
détour or zig-zag.

In the neighbourhood of Woking one day when the floods were out, she
stopped to ask the way, and was informed that the route she proposed
to take was under water and dangerous. It would have been awkward to
change plans at that stage, so S. J.-B. drove on, though the water
gradually rose above the axles.

Presently a meek voice was heard from the groom behind. “He said it
was dangerous.” But S. J.-B. did not hear.

She was never foolhardy, but she did love the off-chance of an
adventure, and there would have been danger often if her nerve had
given way, or if she had not had a thorough understanding with her
horse. In the moment of emergency one saw what excellent comrades
they were. She knew how to get the last ounce of pluck and endurance
out of him in case of need.

It was all made up to him when the strain was over! That hot mash on
reaching the inn was the first thing thought of, and on a trying day
there was always a snack of some sort for the groom before the inn
was reached, so that the thought of his own supper might not bulk
_too_ largely in his general view of life and duty.

She was the friend of all her horses, and was never happy with one
that failed to respond. Blinkers and bearing-reins were an
abomination to her. She even objected to brass, and refused to use
the smart be-crested harness that came to her from her father’s
stable.

Her first favourite was White Angel, a pony. Professor Wilson had
helped her to choose him for a driving-tour in her student days. She
hired him several times and finally bought him. When she was at
Berne for her degree, he lived in her Mother’s stable at Brighton.
“Angel and Turk send their duty,” Mrs. Jex-Blake used to write.
“Master Turk says, ‘Very dull Christmas without Missis. He don’t
think much of Switzerland.’”

White Angel was badly named,—he was a lovable creature, but far more
of a sprite than an angel. There was never any harm in his mischief,
and she used to recount his pranks with the greatest delight. Above
all things he hated to be beaten. Going up Corstorphine Hill, he
would not allow even a pair of horses to pass him. He would allow
them to come close up, and then he would throw up his heels and race
to the top as if the chaise had been a nut-shell. And she enjoyed
his spirit far too much to check him.

He continued this practice up to a period of life when most
creatures place comfort above such expensive luxuries; but there
came a time when he had to give in. Then, as he heard younger hoofs
gaining on him, he would turn his head with great dignity and look
the other way, refusing to see that he was being outdone.

Very early in the days of practice, Blackbird came to reinforce him,
replacing a smarter, more troublesome horse whom S. J.-B. passed on
to Dr. Pechey: and on the whole Blackbird was her dearest horse
friend. He was such a gentleman, so willing to coöperate with her,
and if necessary to exert himself only too much on those occasional
long days in the Highlands. She never could see that he was growing
old and ceasing to be a credit to her,—indeed she seldom could see
that of anything she had cared for. No flower that had brightened
her writing-table was allowed to spend its last hour on an ash-heap.
So Blackbird remained king of the stable, doing an occasional easy
job, till the remonstrances of S. J.-B.’s friends prevailed against
even that, and he was lent to a farmer friend to fill an easy place
in the country.

Everyone meant well and kindly, but the farmer lent him after a time
to a less soft-hearted dairyman, and one day when S. J.-B. went out
to visit her old friend, she found him rheumatic and broken-kneed
and lean. She said scarcely a word, but asked to be left with him in
the stable. She had taken out a feed of beans, Blackbird’s special
weakness, and she gave him the feeding-bag herself,—then put her
arms round his neck and sobbed.

A day or two later Blackbird went to whatever place is reserved for
such good and faithful friends.

There was Austral, too, the favourite of her later years,—a
gentleman in every sense of the word,—his father and mother both in
the Australian stud-book. The father was Oxford, the mother
Uproarious, and the colt had been cleverly named Undergraduate. It
was S. J.-B. who changed his name: she probably thought it
inappropriate to a horse of eight or nine years; and indeed it was a
word that for her was too full of associations.

No other animal came anywhere near horses in her estimation. Cats
she disliked. In the old student days she had gone to see Miss
Pechey at the home of the lady whose children were fortunate enough
to have her for their governess. In the course of dinner, a spoiled
and cherished family cat leapt gently on to the table, coming
between S. J.-B. and the person to whom she was talking. Without
stopping to think, S. J.-B. put out her arm and brushed the cat on
to the floor.

When, some thirty years later, she was recalling how she had
wondered whether so pretty a girl as Miss Pechey _could_ have nerve
enough to study medicine, and how she had been informed by one who
knew that the pretty girl was “calm as an ox,” Mrs. Pechey Phipson
grimly intervened,—“I assure you I was anything but calm when you
swept that cat on to the floor!”

S. J.-B. laughed. And her laugh was a thing to hear,—especially when
the old jokes and the old stories were recalled,—a hearty musical
laugh that brought such wholesome tears to her eyes, and that would
not allow her face to set into really tragic lines.

But there is something more to be said about her dislike to cats.
After lunch at Bruntsfield Lodge, it was her custom to gather up the
bits of bread that were left and take them out to the lawn to feed
the birds. She loved to see the creatures flying towards her the
moment she appeared, and no cat was ever tolerated in the grounds.

One evening in early summer, when she came in from her work to a
high-walled garden all shimmering with promise, a half-grown kitten
stood in the way. “Shoo!” said S. J.-B. “Go away! Who allowed that
cat to be here?”

Everyone trembled,—except the little intruder. It looked S. J.-B.
full in the face, and held its ground.

Of course it was turned out, but a few days later she saw it in the
same place, leaping at a moth in the sunshine. And that time nothing
was said.

And a few days later still, when she had passed beyond the garden
into the house, the kitten walked forward to meet her. This really
was too much; but when she protested, the kitten simply looked in
her face and smiled.

So it was allowed to remain under due restrictions, until one night
S. J.-B. was awakened by a loud sneeze. She struck a light, and
there, on the shoulder of the sofa at the foot of her bed, calmly
reposing on a big woollen shawl, with its eyes fixed on her in
gentle protest against the open window, was the kitten.

It was simply uncanny. Of course it was only a kitten, but to S. J.-
B. it was always more. “It must have known me in a previous
incarnation,” she said. So she called it Karma, and before many days
were over it was a favoured and lovable member of the household,
taking all sorts of liberties in the most attractive way, and even
lying unforbidden on her lap. “Li’l cat!” she used to say
affectionately.

There is one more animal friend worth recalling, though pedigree and
admirers he had none,—the Nameless Dog at Bordighera.

S. J.-B. had gone to Bordighera in the winter of 1897-98 with a
friend who had been ill, and greatly did she enjoy the almost
unfailing sunshine. She seldom made acquaintances under such
conditions, but two delightful Irish ladies proved irresistible, and
a pleasant _partie carrée_ was the result. Every day S. J.-B. used
to walk with one or other of her friends through the unlovely main
street and sit for hours on the rocks at the Cap, watching the waves
tumbling about on that fine bit of coast.

One day, in passing through the somewhat squalid town, she was
stopped by a brawl among a few dogs,—a poor half-starved pariah was
being set upon and robbed of some morsel it had contrived to pick
up. Never was a more unwholesome-looking object than that dog,—with
a coat utterly out of condition,—wounds in every stage of refusal to
heal,—and an eye so mauled and battered that only a sanguine
prognosis could have associated it with the idea of any special
function in the future. The poor wretch showed no fight, but slunk
away as soon as its tormentors would let it go,—a pitiful craven,
utterly beaten in the struggle for life.

Next day it was seen again, slinking about in some bye-way, afraid
of everyone who came near. Of course S. J.-B. had a crust in her
pocket, and of course the dog got that crust, in spite of rivals and
in spite of its own groundless fears. Next day it was looking out,
and from that day the crust never failed. Little by little the
natural vitality of the creature began to gain ground; he became
something like a dog, and able to hold his own. His wounds healed,
and he soon could forage a bit for himself; but he never forgot to
look out for S. J.-B., and he never refused her crust. He began to
walk with her to the Cap, and to lie at a respectful distance till
she was ready to go home.

One day when she was confined to the house, he appeared on the steps
of the hotel. The waiter of course gave him a greeting that in
former times would have driven him well on the road to San Remo; but
now he held his ground. “What on earth does he want?” said the man.
“Oh,” said one of the others, “it’s Miss Blake’s dog.” At that
moment S. J.-B. came downstairs to _déjeuner_. She fetched him half
her roll from the dining-room, and the waiters might grumble as they
pleased.

From that time the dog formally constituted himself her body-guard,
and quite a creditable body-guard he was, with two good keen eyes
always on the look-out, and a coat worth wearing. He had positively
acquired a “presence.” He waited for her every day at the hotel
gate, and he walked proudly in front of her to the Cap. No other dog
dared to come near. No beggar ventured to molest. The very purveyors
of inlaid jewellery had to keep their distance.

At last—just before she left the Riviera—the Nameless Dog secured a
large bit of strongly smelling fish. There would have been a free
fight for it in the early days, but no other dog disputed his
possession of it now. He can’t have been overfed, poor fellow, even
then; but he brought his coveted trophy to S. J.-B. in triumph, and
laid it at her feet.

I am afraid he missed her horribly, and of course she could not
explain to him and say Goodbye,—as no doubt she did to Blackbird.
But she left behind a creature able to stand on his own legs, and
show a brave face to the world: I am not sure that she didn’t leave
behind the germ of a soul.

And, while this little story is scrupulously true, it tells in a
humble parable many episodes in the life of S. J.-B. that were known
to very few.




                              CHAPTER VII
                          THE SABBATICAL YEAR


It was that winter at Bordighera that gave her strength and energy
for the final uprooting. The autumn of 1898-99 was spent on a
driving tour of 1100 miles through the S.E. counties of England in
search of a suitable house. She set about the search in her usual
business-like way,—pasting into a book all the likely houses from
the agents’ lists, rejecting at a sweep all within ten miles of
London, all above or below a certain price and acreage, all that
fell short of the desired level above the sea, all that were in a
town, or that advertised their proximity to a railway station. The
tour was then planned to include as many as possible of those that
remained.

There were a few unusual disqualifications. One house that attracted
her belonged to the Rector of the parish, who refused to let to a
Roman Catholic or a dissenter, and, although S. J.-B. was neither,
she did not wish to be subjected to any test. Another house—more
strangely still—was only to be let to someone who would carry on the
evangelistic meetings in an out-building. “What if I were to take
the house and preach Buddhism?” she said.

Finally she decided on the house which she afterwards named
Windydene, near the village of Mark Cross, on the Forest Ridge of
Sussex, some five or six miles south of Tunbridge Wells. “It is
neither a new or an old house,” she wrote to her friend, Miss
Keily,—“built probably some 50 years ago,—very comfortable and airy,
and with pleasant garden and shrubberies, a good kitchen garden
(much neglected of late) and about 8 acres for pasture and hay.”

Having put various negotiations and alterations in train, she
returned to Edinburgh for the final winding-up.

And there was much in those last months that lingered pleasantly in
her memory. In June 1898 the British Medical Association had met in
Edinburgh, and S. J.-B., like most other doctors, had kept open
house. Some thirty medical women were present at the meeting, and,
before it broke up, Dr. Jane Walker organized a dinner under the
presidency of the old Edinburgh pioneer. Mrs. Garrett Anderson and
Mrs. Scharlieb were among the guests. As always, S. J.-B. spoke very
happily, and a number of those present got for the first time
something like a just impression of her personality.

Early in 1899 a Farewell Reception was given in her honour by the
Committee of her Hospital, and some happy inspiration made the
occasion not only a social success, but a gathering of unique
interest. The majority of the large company were in evening dress,
but the Dispensary patients were encouraged to look upon the
Reception as their affair too, and they came in what dress they had.
Moreover, it was no mere “meeting,” it was a real “party,” with
refreshments galore in a side room, and no compulsion to listen to
more speeches than one was in a mood for. The Marchioness of Bute,
President of the Hospital, who was ill, was represented by one of
the Vice-Presidents, Lady Helen Munro Ferguson. Lady Victoria
Campbell made a point of being present, as did the Countess of
Moray, and many patients, colleagues and allies of all sorts.

It was Professor Masson who moved the resolution of the evening:

  “That this company, remembering all that has been done by Dr. Jex-
  Blake so preëminently for the medical education of women, and for
  the opening up of the medical profession to women, both here and
  elsewhere, take this opportunity of congratulating her on the
  present evidence of the success everywhere of the cause which owes
  so much to her powerful initiation and persevering advocacy; and
  regrets that the occasion should also be one of farewell.”

Dr. Balfour felt inclined, he said, to quote the words of the old
song:

           “Dost thou remember, comrade old and hoary,
           The days we fought and conquered side by side
           On fields of battle, famous now in story?”

He indicated apologetically that the words were not wholly
appropriate, but S. J.-B. speedily set his mind at rest on that
score. She felt old and hoary enough.

Dr. Peel Ritchie recalled how he had begun to help the women
students simply from love of fair play, with no enthusiasm at all
for the cause, but how he had been gradually worked up to a warmer
feeling and interest; and Dr. (afterwards Sir John) Sibbald
confessed that he had taken no part in the old conflict at all; but
acknowledged gladly that his original dislike to the whole thing had
gradually given way as he had watched the life of the protagonist,
with increasing admiration, appreciation and....”

At that fine silence he left it.

A bouquet of roses was presented by Dr. Jessie Macgregor, one of the
most brilliant of S. J.-B.’s students; and a basket of flowers by
Winifred Beilby, daughter of a lady who had been a member of
Committee for many years, and a patient from the first.

Yes, it was a great send-off, and S. J.-B. was simple-hearted enough
to enjoy it all like a child.

There were other tokens of recognition too,—among them a
presentation from a great number of women doctors, and another from
the Dispensary patients.

                  *       *       *       *       *

There is no doubt that Dr. Sibbald voiced the opinion of many in his
tribute to S. J.-B. For years she had lived among the Edinburgh
people, driving about in her quiet brougham or unpretentious pony-
chaise, and retiring to the high-walled garden. In a way they could
not but get to know her. They might like or dislike her, but she
went on her way, doing her work absolutely without ostentation,
welcoming publicity when it seemed likely to forward her aims or the
welfare of the community, shunning it absolutely as a matter of
private taste.

With most of these whose opinion was worth having, opposition and
dislike were simply worn down. She was impulsive, she made mistakes
and would do so to the end of her life: her naturally hasty temper
and imperious disposition had been chastened indeed, but the
chastening fire had been far too fierce to produce perfection. She
held out at times about trifles,—failed to see that they _were_
trifles—and at times she terrified people more than she knew. Above
all she cared nothing for the praise and blame of any but those whom
she respected or loved. Of her indeed it might be said that she
heard the beat of a different drummer. But there was another side to
the picture after all. Many of those who regretted and criticised
details were yet forced to bow before the big transparent honesty,
the fine unflinching consistency, of her life.

               “Yes, it was simply greatness.
                 There was nothing else I could say,
               I had hedged my path more straitly,
                 But [hers] was the kinglier way.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

It remains only to give some picture of S. J.-B.’s life in
retirement. Dr. Clouston had shaken his head when he heard what she
proposed to do. It was a great risk to give up a life packed with
work and interest for one of leisure.

“I am not going to be idle,” she had said. “I am going to farm.”

“Then you’ll lose a lot of money.”

“I can’t lose much on ten acres.”

“_Ah!_” He seemed to indicate that ten acres was not enough; but as
a matter of fact S. J.-B. reaped now all the advantage of that love
of detail which had so often proved a snare. “Windydene” had been
unoccupied and more or less neglected for some time, so there was
abundant scope for an enterprising “Squire.” And the situation was
as choice as even the county of Sussex can provide. From the terrace
one looked right across to the South Downs, and even Fairlight was
supposed to be visible on a clear day. The garden had been ideally
planned on ground that fell away rather steeply to the south. It had
spacious lawns cunningly planted, some of the trees being of real
value and beauty.

Beyond the lawns were shady paths and all sort of unexpected
openings and surprises; and beyond these again were the meadows
hedged with blackberries, and carpeted in spring with cowslip and
ladies’ smock. From the meadows one passed through to the woods, and
so to the whole billowy stretch of the Weald, with its varied
foliage, its blue lights and chasing shadows, its lakes of white
mist in the still summer mornings.

S. J.-B. had seen the place first in November. She actually took
possession in May, when the red chestnuts were in bloom and the
woods full of bluebells.

“‘The lines have fallen to me in pleasant places’,” she said, “‘I
have a goodly heritage’;” and the words were constantly on her lips
till the end. Kipling’s “Sussex by the Sea” might have been written
for her, so gratefully did she take possession of it.

                 “Each to his choice, and I rejoice
                   The lot has fallen to me
                 In a fair ground—in a fair ground—
                   Yea, Sussex by the sea!”

Her first care was to institute a fruit garden, building a south
wall and planting vines, figs, peaches, nectarines and apricots. In
the course of a few years her strawberries in particular had
acquired quite a reputation.

She started a dairy too, and supervised it herself. It was a real
joy to her to have cows in the paddock and to produce her own cream
and butter. The hay-making and the harvest supper were great events
in the year.

But long before she had got as far as this—before the house was more
than tolerably straight after the great flitting—she was inviting
guests to share the joys of the spring and summer. All through the
later years of her life she had the intimate daily companionship she
prized so generously, but her doors stood open always as of old.
“Windydene is a Mecca,” one of the younger medical women said, and
there were those to whom it was a Mecca and something more. From S.
J.-B.’s old fellow-students down to some unknown girl graduate, they
came from all parts of the world. We have seen what Dr. Lillie
Saville thought of life at Windydene, and indeed Lady Jenkinson’s
“soul and body, especially soul” often finds an echo. A woman doctor
who met S. J.-B. first at that British Medical Association dinner in
Edinburgh writes years later:

  “Thinking it over, I see that the best new influence that came
  into my life during the last seven years was the Doctor’s young
  fresh interest, her enthusiasm, her breadth of mind, her spiritual
  force and faith, and her strong original wisdom.”

But it was not only women doctors who came. Literary folk were
guests too, and, above all, the old friends, whatever they had
chanced to become. Miss Du Pre, Lady Jenkinson, Miss Catharine
Eliott-Lockhart, Miss E. Cordery, Mrs. Gardiner, Mr. James Cordery,
Mr. Phipson and Dr. Pechey Phipson, Mrs. (Dr.) Mears, and many
others. The arrival of Dr. Agnes M‘Laren from her season’s practice
on the Riviera was one of the events of the early summer; she always
came by Newhaven and so to Crowborough, where S. J.-B. faithfully
awaited her. A still earlier event in the year was the arrival of
Miss Caroline Jex-Blake, “when the primroses were out,” and her joy
in the meadows and woods was a thing that only those who knew her
could conceive.

Little enough entertainment in the ordinary sense was offered to the
guests at any time. Breakfast in bed was an unfailing institution
for tired workers, and most of the guests were tired workers. There
was fruit and cream to heart’s content and beyond it; there were
long leisurely drives uphill and down dale through that beautiful
country,[158]—plenty of chess for those who were worthy of chess,—
unforgettable evenings round the study fire; and at all other times—
stated meals apart—an almost unlimited choice of books,—and liberty
to do as one pleased.

Footnote 158:

  “I took her to see the pixies,” writes S. J.-B. to a friend, in
  June, “I don’t think she did see any, but she greatly enjoyed the
  woods, etc.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

S. J.-B. used to say that her one extravagance at Windydene was
journals and books. She had always been a book buyer, and books were
more essential than ever now. New shelves had to be put up every
year or so. Her collection of recent novels alone induced a well-
known publisher to say that she ought to have a testimonial from
authors and publishers. There was a certain amount of practical
benevolence in this. In Edinburgh she had often said that an
important part of her treatment of patients was the lending of
suitable novels, and at Windydene she often had twenty or thirty
books out at a time. Her taste was catholic in the extreme, but she
specially appreciated among others _Peter Ibbetson_, _San Celestino_
and _Out of Due Time_; and—like so many distinguished people—she
keenly enjoyed detective stories, especially for reading in the
watches of the night.

She had lost none of her love of poetry. The “poetry book-case” had
an honoured place as of old; but, as she sat in her big chair by the
fire, she had a revolving stand filled with special favourites
within reach of her right hand, and, on her left (in the angle of
the chimney-piece) a tiny set of shelves brought from the
corresponding nook in her Edinburgh consulting room, contained her
Mother’s Bible and a few other chosen friends.

But the range of her purchases during those later years was very
wide: almost at random one recalls Blomefield’s _Norfolk_, all
Father Tyrrell’s works, a whole library of books on social
problems,—industry, poverty, labour, etc.—and a fine copy of _The
Book of the Dead_.

She retained her old interest in what one may call the polemics of
religion, and this was intensified by a delightful and unexpected
friendship of those later days.

She had not been many weeks in Mark Cross before some mutual friend
suggested that she might care to know the Roman Catholic priest—a
man, as it chanced, of scholarship and culture—following up the
suggestion with the loan of a book which the priest had published
some years before.[159] A few days later S. J.-B. wrote the
following letter:

                                                  “June 15th [1899].

  DEAR SIR,

        I have been reading your book on Reunion with very great
  sympathy and admiration; and, if you care to call on an elderly
  woman who is not of your creed, I should be very glad to have the
  honour of making your acquaintance.

  I expect to be at home tomorrow afternoon, or could fix any day
  except Monday, next week, if more convenient to you.

                                    Yours truly,
                                              SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE, M.D.

  Rev. Father Duggan.”

Footnote 159:

  _Steps towards Reunion._ The book had been put on the Index
  Expurgatorius.

It did not strike the looker-on as a specially likely combination,
but it was the unlikely thing that happened. The Revd. Father Duggan
became one of the most welcome guests at Windydene. He and his dog,
Caesar, used to drop in almost every Sunday afternoon for
strawberries on the lawn or tea round the study fire. I don’t
pretend that Caesar took any interest in the strawberries—possible
rabbits were a more absorbing subject—but he did enjoy his bowl of
tea, especially when a lump of sugar remained at the bottom as a
_bonne bouche_. He was the centre of interest when his turn came,
and, when the anticipated “crunch” was heard, the general laugh of
sympathy never failed. They were just happy children together,—the
Dog, the Reverend Father and the old Pioneer, and now the world is
the poorer for the loss of all three.

There were great talks on those Sunday afternoons; it was no
uncommon thing to see three versions of the Bible and half a dozen
volumes of the _Encyclopaedia_ lying about at the end to witness to
the interest of the discussion. There was much borrowing and lending
of books,—and no obvious change of view on the part of anyone except
in the direction of increased tolerance and brotherly kindness. A
very simple anecdote will give as good an idea as any of the nature
of the friendship.

Father Duggan had been the lender of Canon Cheyne’s _Commentary on
the Psalms_, which he had just reviewed for a daily paper.

  “I won’t pretend that I read the whole of it,” said S. J.-B. in
  returning the volumes. “In fact”—with a sparkle of mischief,—“I
  noticed when it came that only about a quarter of the leaves were
  cut.”

  “Yes,” he admitted tranquilly. “I did think of cutting a few more
  before sending it up to you,—but I didn’t.”

  “_Ah, no!_” she said. “You were an honest man.”

She was on excellent terms, too, with the local doctors: they looked
forward to a chat when they met her in the country lanes, and, if,
when she left Edinburgh, there had been any hatchet left to bury,
their boyish camaraderie would soon have compelled her to bury it.
“I confess I had a prejudice against women doctors,” one of them
said after her death, “but she disarmed me completely.”

The life at Windydene was not unbroken. The clay soil in that wooded
garden was not conducive to the health of a rheumatic person like S.
J.-B., so several brief winters were spent at various places on the
Riviera, and one in Portugal, mainly in the Sacred Forest at
Bussaco. At Carqueiranne in Provence one of the editors of the
_Matin_ was a fellow guest, and he proved another unexpected
comrade. It must have been a matter of some surprise to him to meet
in that unlikely place, an elderly English gentlewoman with a grasp
of the range of European politics and a facility for discussing it
in excellent French.

It was at Carqueiranne that she and the intimate friend of those
days met Mr. Frederic Myers and Professor William James, and here
too there was a pleasant _partie carrée_ for some days with
Professor and Mrs. Gardiner who were on a cycling tour in the south
of France. Professor Gardiner had several times been S. J.-B.’s
guest in Edinburgh, when his researches brought him north to inspect
some unique document among the archives there, and it was a pleasant
change to meet when both were in purely holiday mood.

In the late Autumn of 1909—in spite of increasing physical
disqualifications—she made a last driving tour to her beloved
Yarrow.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is needless to say that she never lost her interest in the
happenings of the world. She had latterly a profound distrust of
Germany, and was an eager reader of the articles on this subject in
the _National Review_. _The Riddle of the Sands_ was a novel that
she helped to circulate widely. Her name appeared pretty frequently
in the correspondence columns of the _Times_, sometimes in
connection with Woman Suffrage, more often in unavailing protest
against the endless “joy-riding”—degenerating into the sheer
lawlessness of the “road-hog”—that was making the loveliest English
lanes a nightmare of dust and danger.

It was to the _Times_, too, that she sent her last tribute to the
most heroic of her Edinburgh friends in the old days of the “fight.”

  “SIR,—It seems impossible to let the grave close over the mortal
  remains of Professor Masson without one word of heartfelt
  gratitude from those whom he befriended so nobly in 1869 and the
  following years. Our struggle with the University was hard enough
  as it was, but without his help and that of half a dozen other men
  it would have been impracticable. I feel that it is really quite
  impossible to do justice to the chivalry, the unselfishness, the
  constant readiness to espouse the unpopular cause, and to fight in
  its foremost ranks, which characterized Professor Masson, and it
  would take far too much of your space to say even a fraction of
  what could be said of the aid he gave us in that great battle.

  But I beg you at least to allow me to say that those so deeply
  indebted to him will never forget him, but hold his memory in love
  and reverence as long as they live.

                                   Yours obediently,
                                                   SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.

  Windydene, Mark Cross, Sussex, Oct. 10 [1907].”

The suffrage movement was always near her heart, though she never
grew restless or impatient over the long delay. She never approved
of tax-resistance, and militant methods made her uneasy, though she
admitted that they had given the cause a prominence that nothing
else could have done. Looking back in 1879 on her own fight she had
been able to say, “We seemed led all the way; certainly our aim was
straight at the end [before us], but ‘highly and holily’ too. I
never minded dirt of others’ throwing, but I don’t think I ever
smirched my own conscience.” It was in her favour that the Editor of
the _Spectator_ broke through his stern rule of excluding all
letters advocating the extension of the franchise to women. “Our
respect for so eminent a lady makes it a pleasure to publish Dr.
Sophia Jex-Blake’s letter.”

It was this question of the suffrage, too, as we shall see, that
brought her for the last time into touch with Octavia Hill.

S. J.-B.’s outer circle had never suspected her of being
“religious,” and even by the fireside she spoke less perhaps, rather
than more, on the subject as time went on; but the old quotations
kept flashing up to witness to the fire beneath. She was always
profoundly interested in any genuine profession of faith, any real
conversion or perversion. Several of her friends joined the Church
of Rome in those later years, and she was one to whom they always
felt the need of justifying themselves. They felt sure of an
underlying sympathy, however she might disapprove. Often, of course,
she declined to take the matter too seriously. To an old student she
wrote:

  “I am not at all shocked at your Sunday programme, but I must say
  I am amused at your going to a dissenting chapel.”

And again:

  “I don’t trouble myself much about who goes ‘over to Rome’ and who
  does not. After all for each one,—‘To his own Master he stands or
  falls,’ and what we must ask of each is to act to the best of his
  lights.

  But I think ‘subterfuging’ implies dim lights.”

Her own attitude grew steadily simpler, enriching the vital elements
of her Mother’s creed with the wisdom and experience of her own
life. As time went on she disliked increasingly to be classed with
those whose attitude towards religion is one of indifference. Even
before she left Edinburgh she had written to an old school friend,
in acknowledgement of a book by another schoolfellow:

  “To speak plainly then it strikes me as crude and superficial,—as
  the work of a person who has caught up passwords rather than of
  one who has struggled through the conflict of thought personally.
  It reminds me forcibly of the old proverb, ‘Qui pauca considerat
  facile pronuntiat.’ The deeper we go into problems, whether social
  or religious, the less possible it seems to me to pronounce about
  them offhand.

  In theology you would, I suppose, rank me among the Agnostics, as
  I feel very strongly how little we _know_ on such subjects, and
  that the truly scientific aspect of mind is one of suspension of
  judgment; but I have no sympathy at all with C.’s attacks on
  Christianity and the alleged motives of its advocates, and still
  less with her estimate of the character of Christ.

  The programme of Socialism strikes me (so far as I understand it)
  as unworkable, because it ignores a great many of the facts of
  human nature; and I am sure you are right in thinking that the
  true path of progress lies in gradual improvement, and gradual
  removal of unjust restrictions, rather than in sudden violence and
  revolution.”

To a much more intimate friend she had written about the same time:

  “Yes, I think —— is what I should call an Agnostic, but perhaps
  you from lordly heights of orthodoxy don’t appreciate that that
  differs ‘toto caelo’ from an atheist; and that it is one of the
  most offensive of errors,—and one frequently made from culpable
  carelessness,—to substitute the one for the other.”

Her appreciation of the Bible increased—and it had always been an
exceptional appreciation;—but there are two quotations that stand
out in one’s memory as belonging to her in a special sense. She
always appropriated to herself with great fervour the prayer of
Agur:—“Two things have I required of thee...: Remove far from me
vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with
food convenient for me; lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who
is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain.”

And more than once, after quoting the words from Isaiah:—“Thus saith
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy;
I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and
to revive the heart of the contrite ones,” she added almost under
her breath,

“I am not sure that that is not the finest thing in the whole
Bible.”

But while she was one of those to whom the Old Testament makes
perhaps a special appeal, it was not by accident that at the time of
her death, and for years previously, the words were fixed above the
mantelpiece, both in her study and in her bedroom,—“Bear ye one
another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Some years before leaving Edinburgh, S. J.-B. had a heart attack
which caused Dr. Balfour grave uneasiness, and, although she rallied
in the course of a week, similar attacks kept recurring at
considerable intervals. On one occasion at Windydene she was
unconscious for several hours, and finally “came out of blackness”
to ask with great calmness, “Well, what do you suppose has
happened?”

Within a week of this attack she started for the Riviera.

It is probable that she never fully realized the seriousness of
these cardiac signs and symptoms; but, in one way or another, death
knocked at her door pretty frequently during those later years.

In 1901-2, she suffered from a mysterious and anomalous “growth,”
for which a leading London surgeon refused to operate on the ground
that she was a bad subject. She was not sorry for the refusal, but
the enemy grew with appalling rapidity, and it became increasingly
clear that something would have to be done. All through the period
of uncertainty she went on with her life absolutely as usual. “I did
wake up one night in a horror of great darkness,” she confessed,
“wondering what was going to happen; but very soon Whittier’s words
came into my mind:

                 “I know not what the future hath
                   Of marvel or surprise,
                 Assured alone that life and death
                   His mercy underlies....

                 I know not where His islands lift
                   Their fronded palms in air;
                 I only know I cannot drift
                   Beyond His love and care.”

And then I just turned over on the other side and went to sleep
again.”

“How thankful we should be,” she said on another occasion, “that we
don’t know what is before us. Life is hard enough, it would be much
harder if we knew.”

When a friend remarked on her courage, she said,—and this was a
remark repeated many times before the end of her life,—“No, no. I
have been brave sometimes in my life, but not now. There is nothing
to be brave about now.”

In response one day to a warmer expression of admiration, she almost
cried out in protest,—“_Oh!_ ... God be merciful to me a sinner.
That is what one feels more and more.” Then, after a pause:

          “‘Suffice it if—my good and ill unreckoned,
            And both forgiven through Thy abounding grace—
          I find myself by hands familiar beckoned
            Unto my fitting place.’”

Another day she said, “My life here will not be much longer, but I
feel that I have not reached the end. I have learnt a great deal,
and I have a great deal still to learn. Unless one has absolutely
_refused_ to learn, one must get the chance to learn more.”

Her friend quoted Thring. “My creed is life. Blessed is life the
King, etc.”

“Ah,” she said, “I don’t know that it will be _better_ than this
life, but it will give us the chance to learn fresh things.”

It was on that occasion that she looked death in the face while
still in full possession of her powers—“‘I laid me down with a
will,’” she said—; but for the moment the sacrifice was not required
of her. When the malady reached a point at which surgical
interference was at worst a necessary palliative, she proposed to
ask two of her own old students to come and undertake an operation.
It was represented to her that it was scarcely fair to put so great
a responsibility on them,[160] so she wrote to her friend, Mr.
Cathcart of Edinburgh, asking him to come and undertake the case. He
came at once, of course, and the operation proved a triumphant
success.[161]

Footnote 160:

  At that time very few women had come into the front rank as
  surgeons.

Footnote 161:

  Her old fellow student, Dr. Annie Clark, who had graduated with
  her at Berne, came from Birmingham to give the anaesthetic.

So life was given back to her just as she had laid it down, and the
remaining years were in some respects the happiest and most peaceful
she had known. She renewed her youth, though in truth she had never
grown old, and lived more than ever in the life of her “girls.” She
had always said, “Not me, but us.” Now more and more the “us” came
into the centre of her scheme of life. Perhaps her last ambition was
that some British University should give her its honorary degree,
but her friends only realized this when she had already laid the
ambition down. “I shall never have a University hood,” she said once
or twice quite simply. All the more she enjoyed the glories of the
young women doctors who were coming on. She listened to their
accounts of what they had learned and of what they had done with an
admiration that was nothing short of poignant in its simplicity. Her
own share in the whole thing simply dropped out. At most she would
say when some gifted visitor was gone, “Wonderful the work she is
doing! Well, I did help a little bit once upon a time, didn’t I?”

It was when one of her old girls seemed face to face for the first
time with that most bitter disappointment in a doctor’s experience,—
the loss of a patient for whose life one has fought with repeated
recrudescence of hope in the teeth of despair,—that S. J.-B. wrote
one of her last letters:

                                                  “Windydene,
                                            7 p.m. March 19th. 1911.

  DEAR CHILD,

        I _am_ so sorry for you, and I think of you so much! It is
  an experience that has to come to all of us who live in our work,—
  and we must believe ‘we shall see in heaven why it could not be
  otherwise.’

  Meanwhile ‘the Healer by Gennesaret shall walk thy rounds with
  thee.’

  When it is all over,—for I suppose that is now the end,—I think
  you should come down here for a few perfectly quiet days. We shall
  be so glad to have you.

                                       Yours sincerely,
                                                           S. J.-B.”

There was, of course, one visitor whom she would fain have welcomed
to her “pleasant places.” She had followed Octavia Hill’s life with
unfailing interest, and had subscribed to the Derwentwater scheme,
and to other of Miss Hill’s beneficent works. In July or August 1910
a letter opposing the extension of the suffrage to women appeared in
the _Times_ above the signature of Octavia Hill. S. J.-B. replied to
the letter, regretting that Miss Hill should have “given the support
of her honoured name” to the negative side of the controversy. The
_Times_ did not often refuse a communication from S. J.-B., but on
this occasion her letter was not inserted. Perhaps the trifling
episode called up memories too insistent to be stilled, for a day or
two later she wrote to her old friend:

                                          “August 5th. 1910.
                                      Windydene, Mark Cross, Sussex.

  DEAR,

        I wrote enclosed mainly as an answer to yours in the
  _Times_, and as it has been sent back to me, crowded out, I send
  it to you,—to show you another old woman’s point of view.

  I am rheumatic and lame now, and cannot go about much, but I wish
  you would come down and spend two or three days with me here on
  the Sussex hills, and we would thrash out this Suffrage question—
  surely one of us ought to be able to convince the other!

  And I _should_ like to see you again!

                                      Yours sincerely,
                                                       S. JEX-BLAKE.

  I grieved greatly with you in your loss in June.”[162]

Footnote 162:

  Miss Miranda Hill died in June 1910.

Miss Octavia Hill had allowed herself no “sabbatical year,” and she
was flagging in harness. Her life had been spent in unremitting
service of her fellow men. She answered her old friend’s letter, but
she could not respond. One has no difficulty in understanding her
attitude now. A conventional meeting would have been useless, and
anything else would have involved a greater upheaval than most
people are willing to face as life goes on.

And it well may be that she had acted wisely all along. As Mrs. Jex-
Blake had said many years before with that strange _pre_vision that
is given sometimes to the pure in heart,—“God has two great works,—
one for her, one for you.”

Those two great works could never have been combined.

And, indeed, no one with a disposition like S. J.-B.’s can go
through life without losing friends. She might have said with St.
Teresa,—“For one thing, the devil sometimes fills me with such a
harsh and cruel temper; such a spirit of anger and hostility at some
people, that I could eat them up and annihilate them.” But, as in
the case of St. Teresa, the obverse side of the medal was a capacity
for loving that can seldom have been surpassed in our human nature.
“Went not my heart with thee...?” she used to say: and it did,—not
only with those nearest to her, but with all who appealed to her
mother-heart. The comforting letter was written, in spite of all
fatigue and inconvenience, at the earliest possible moment: the box
of flowers, the grapes, the wine, the cheque, the open hospitable
doors,—all seemed messengers waiting for their turn, like the swift-
heeled servants of the Fairy Queen.

No appeal ever came to her that she ignored. The Charity
Organisation Society was familiar with her name; and great sometimes
was her disappointment when those she wanted to help were pronounced
hopeless or unworthy. Nothing that she loved ever grew old. Her
friends, her horses,—even the purely material things to which she
was attached—grew more beautiful in her eyes as their market value
decreased. She always parted deliberately with the flowers that had
stood by her hand. No one was ever allowed to throw them away as a
matter of routine, and often she would raise them to her lips before
putting them in the fire.

St. Teresa’s love no doubt was a more transcendent thing. It was her
lot to live in an age of faith. S. J.-B. often quoted Whittier’s
_Autograph_:

                  “If of the Law’s stone table,
                  To hold he scarce was able
                  The first great precept fast,
                  He kept for man the last.

                  Through mortal lapse and dulness
                  What lacks the Eternal Fulness,
                  If still our weakness can
                  Love Him in loving man?”

There are those of whom Teresa herself said:

  “They may have more merit in His eyes than their more favoured
  neighbours, because their obedience and their faith and their love
  have cost them more. Their Lord deals with them as with strong and
  valiant men, appointing them travail and trouble here, that they
  may fight for Him the good fight of faith, and only come in for
  the prize at the end.”

No portrait gives any adequate idea of Sophia Jex-Blake. Someone who
saw her first in 1886 writes:

  “Although too stout in figure, she had a fine commanding presence,
  and one was struck at once by the exceeding _comeliness_ of her
  face. It was strong, wise and benevolent, capable of an
  extraordinary range of expression. The brow was ideally shaped,
  broad and serene in repose, though always liable to the summer
  lightnings that one half admired, half dreaded. Her hair was
  growing white, but the eyebrows remained black till the end, and
  the eyes, both by nature and by the long discipline of life, were
  extraordinarily fine and expressive.”

It was twenty years later than this that a girl friend said,—“She
has the look of one ‘following fearlessly’.” Throughout life, the
tendency to sadness of expression was wholly contradicted by her
smile; her eyes very readily bubbled over with merriment; as some
reporter had said in the days of the fight, “With those dimples she
must be good-natured.” When an old servant was shown the final
portrait in this volume, she said, “But I want her to look up at me
and laugh as she used to do!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

One does not wish to dwell on the history of the last few months.
From the physical point of view it is a familiar story. One by one
every medicament lost its efficacy: the failing heart ceased to
invigorate one organ after another. But the strong and disciplined
will held the shattered tabernacle together. Sometimes acute
symptoms forced her to stay in bed for a day or two, but she always
struggled on to her feet again at the earliest possible moment and
went for the daily drive through her beloved lanes and woods. True
that towards the end she noticed these less and less,—drowsed most
of the way; but, if there was occasion to rouse herself and speak to
anyone, she did so almost as of old.

“The worst of lying awake at night,” she used to say whimsically,
“is that one realizes all the mistakes one has made in one’s life.”
It was not even _lying_ awake sometimes: it was a weary sitting up
or lying down as each position in turn became intolerable. And
often, after only three minutes’ unconsciousness, she would exclaim
in something like the old happy voice, “I have had such a lovely
sleep!”

Almost to the last day she repeated bits of her favourite poems and
psalms,—and nothing gave her so much pleasure as to plan holidays
for those who still had a day’s work before them. She was infinitely
mindful of those who tended her. Almost her last words were,—“Now do
go and have a good rest.”

And so the end came,—suddenly but not unexpectedly. She sat down one
day more tired than usual—it was the 7th January, 1912—stretched
herself back, and rendered up her soul to God who gave it.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A great wave of feeling arose in the village and round about when it
was known that the familiar figure of the old warrior would no more
be seen in her Sussex lanes. Perplexed at first, her neighbours of
all classes had come in a measure to understand her, to be proud of
her,—some of them to love her. With one or two, indeed, she had
formed a warm and intimate friendship. There was every token of
respectful sympathy and mourning when the little procession made its
way to Rotherfield Church.[163]

Footnote 163:

  By a strange coincidence she lies within a few yards of her old
  friend and champion, Sir James Stansfeld. See Appendix G.

And that wave of feeling went out over the whole world. Messages and
tributes of appreciation and regret poured steadily in. The most
beautiful and adequate was the paragraph in the _Pall Mall Gazette_:

  “The woman as Happy Warrior has passed away with the death in her
  Sussex home of Sophia Jex-Blake. There is scarcely an attribute of
  the great figure in Wordsworth’s poem which she did not possess,
  with the crowning added happiness of seeing her fame as a noble
  and successful pioneer in a great movement finally established.
  She it was, more than anyone else, who compelled the gates of the
  medical profession to be opened to women. Through years of
  hostility and obloquy she never lost heart in her Cause; and,
  meeting violence with reason and coarseness with dignity, she won
  at last. Her longest and bitterest fight was with the University
  of Edinburgh; and, later, when Parliament had recognized the right
  of women to be doctors, it was in that city that she practised for
  twenty-one years. Since the death of Florence Nightingale no woman
  has died of whom more truly may it be written, _Bene actæ vitæ
  recordatio jucundissima est_.

But the reader may find a special propriety in a very simple
resolution passed a few days later in an Over Seas dominion:

  “That the members of the University Women’s Club of Toronto do
  place on record their deep sense of the great influence and noble
  life of Dr. Sophia Jex-Blake. Now that her distinguished career
  has closed, they feel that she was the helper of all University
  women,—and they love her for many reasons.”

THE END




                               APPENDIX A
                    PEDIGREE OF THE JEX-BLAKE FAMILY


S. J.-B.’s father was one of the Blakes of Bunwell, Scottow, etc.,
in the county of Norfolk.

A family of Blakes settled at Bunwell in 1620. It is said
traditionally that they came from Somersetshire and were descended
from the same family as Robert Blake, the great Admiral of the
Commonwealth, being probably a branch of the original family of the
Blaks, Blaaks or Blakes of Pinnels in the parish of Cawne or Calne,
Co. Wilts., there seated as early, at least, as 1400. These families
bore the same arms with slight differences, namely, argent a chevron
between three garbs sable. Crest, on a chapeau gules turned up
ermine, a martlet argent.

In the chancel of Bunwell Church, near the altar rails, is a
tombstone with the following inscription:

          Under this Stone lyeth the Body of Mr John Blake
          He dyed the 21 of August 1686 being sixtie 4
          Yeares of age and upwards.

Above this legend are the arms of Blake as above: on the chevron a
fleur-de-lis for difference.

From this gentleman is descended in direct line all the present
family through his fourth son, Robert Blake, who settled at Scottow
about 1680, marrying Margaret, eldest daughter of William Durrant of
Scottow Hall. Their son, Thomas Blake of Scottow, born November 7th,
1689, married Elizabeth, daughter of John Jex, Esq. of Lowestoft,
and the grandson of these last, William Blake of Swanton Abbots, in
the Commission of the Peace, and Deputy Lieutenant for Norfolk,
having inherited the chief part of the Jex property, obtained on his
petition by Royal Licence on August 17th, 1837, that he and his
descendants should assume and use the surname Jex in addition to and
before that of Blake, and also bear the arms of Jex quarterly, in
the second quarter, with those of Blake.[164]

Footnote 164:

  See _The London Gazette_, Friday, August 25, 1837.




                               APPENDIX B
                 “WORDS FOR THE WAY.”[165]—No. 2. REST

    “There remaineth a Rest for the people of God.”—HEB. IV. 9.

Footnote 165:

  The authors have sought to supply a want, more or less widely
  felt, of simple Tracts, which, while endeavouring to set forth the
  deepest truths of Christianity, shall avoid the phraseology of
  certain schools, as jarring on the minds of many.


  Those who see any degree of successful effort in the Tracts
  already published are invited to assist in obtaining for them, and
  others of the series, such a circulation as may best ensure their
  usefulness.

What is the thing that you wish for most in the world?

I cannot hear your answers to my question, and I do not suppose that
everyone to whom it is addressed would answer it in the same way;
but I must try and fancy to myself what you would be most likely to
say. And first I suppose that each of you would be likely to wish
for that of which he has most felt the need.

Some of you, perhaps, who are very poor, would say, “Money.” Well,
money is a very good thing, and, if we know how to use it rightly, a
great blessing for which to thank God when He gives it to us; but
you might have money, and yet be far from happy—yet have a great
many of your deepest wants unsatisfied. And very many of those who
have most money would be the first to tell you that this is the
case; and I am sure that with very little of it, it is possible to
be very happy if we have some other things.

I hardly think that money is what we should wish for most.

Those of you who are very ill, and who are constantly suffering pain
that seems to be always coming freshly upon you, would perhaps say,
“Health.” Well, that too is a very good and great gift of God’s, and
those of us who have it should thank Him very much for it, and pity
heartily and helpfully those who have it not. But I think that with
even this blessing, there may be very great wants left; and I
believe that it is possible to be very blessed without it. I do not
think that Health satisfies the deepest want of our nature.

And some of you perhaps, who have felt how sad it is to be ignorant
of many things that it would be so good to know, and who are longing
to learn more about God and His great and wonderful works, might say
that “Knowledge” was the gift which of all others you desire.

Some again who have felt how sad it is to stand all alone in this
great world, every part of which God has made so dependent on the
rest,—who long for some heart to lean upon in all life’s troubles,
some hand to help to cut a way through them, will say that “Love” is
the greatest blessing that it seems to them possible to receive.

I have no doubt that if I were really talking to you, or, still
better, could see the thoughts of your hearts, I should be told of
many wants which you earnestly desire to have satisfied,—wants, some
of them belonging to the lower and some of them to the higher part
of that wonderful nature which God has given to us all.

And now perhaps you would like to hear _my_ answer to this question
I have been asking of you, “What is the thing we most want?” It
seems to me that there is one blessing which sums up in itself—which
seems to imply or to contain—almost all others, and which, if we go
deeply enough into it, does really satisfy all the great wants of
our nature. This is REST.

Now let us think what Rest is: and see whether if you had that, you
would have the deepest part of all your wants satisfied.

You said you wanted Money? Well, was not the comfort which you
thought money could give you, just that freedom from care and
anxiety which we call Rest?—was it not really for this, and not for
the money itself, you longed?

And you wanted Health? Is it not just because health would give you
rest from pain and from continual weariness that it seems to you the
best of all things? Does not Health for you really mean Rest?

And is it not because there is something that you are always longing
to know and understand that you desire so much to have Knowledge? Is
not your wish for it founded on the feeling that God gave you a mind
and understanding which can only be satisfied by learning and
knowing. Do you not really desire knowledge that your intellect may
have some firm standing ground?—that it too may have Rest?

And most of all do not you who long for Love, long for it because
you feel that to have some one beside you to feel for you and help
you, to pray with and work with you through all the labours of this
life, is the nearest approach to Rest that we can have on earth,
except that deepest Rest which comes through feeling the constant
nearness of Him who loves most of all, who “will never leave thee
nor forsake thee” (Heb. xiii. 5). If then we can but look forward to
Rest, are we not sure of having _all_ that we need?

And it is just this that is promised to us in the text we read at
the beginning, “There remaineth a Rest for the people of God.” God
knows so well all our wants, and knows so well what will best supply
them, that all through the Bible you will find beautiful promises
about Rest. Let us look at a few of them. Job in the midst of his
great troubles speaks of the future life as that “where the weary
are at Rest” (Job. iii. 17). The prophet Jeremiah promises to those
who will hear God’s will and seek to do it, that they “shall find
Rest for their souls” (Jer. vi. 16). Our Lord Jesus Christ knew well
about this deepest want in our nature when He spoke that most
beautiful of invitations to all who heard Him on earth, and to all
who read His words now, “Come unto me all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and
learn of me; for I am meek and lowly of heart: and ye shall find
Rest unto your souls” (Matt. xi. 28, 29).

And the whole argument of the chapter from which the text we are
talking about is taken, is this, “Let us therefore fear, lest, a
promise being left us of entering into His Rest, any of us should
seem to come short of it” (Heb. iv. 1).

But now let us ask what is implied or meant by those last words
about “coming short of it?” What is meant by our Lord’s telling
people that they must “take His yoke upon them” and be “meek and
lowly of heart” if they would find Rest? What is meant when Rest is
promised specially to the “people of God”?

Now, if we believe that God loves us as He does, quite infinitely—
more than we can even understand—we may be quite sure that He will
always give us every good thing that He can—that He will never put
any limit to His promises if He can help it—that He would like to
give Rest and all other good things to everyone if it were possible.

We must never doubt for one moment God’s willingness to give us all
good things, and to do all for us that it is possible for love to
do. Remember what Christ says about that, “If ye then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven know how to give good things to them
that ask Him (Matt. vii. 11). And again, “I say not that I will pray
the Father for you; for the Father himself loveth you” (John xvi.
26, 27). And St. Paul tells us that “He that spared not His own Son,
but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him freely
give us all things?” (Rom. viii. 32).

So you see that we may be quite sure that if we do not get this
great blessing, Rest, it will not be because God is not willing to
give it to us.

But there are certain great principles, which we call laws, which
govern God’s world, which are of the very nature of God’s own being,
and the more we come to know and realize about these laws, the more
we shall find them to be the most wonderfully good and beautiful and
blessed ones which could be imagined, and see in every one of them
some great and glorious provision for the best possible things,
which could not come without them.

Now you know God made man in His own image (Gen. i. 27), and, though
man afterwards broke that beautiful image and lost the perfect
likeness that God had given him to Himself—(as we are told in
Eccles. vii. 29, “God made man upright; but they have sought out
many inventions”)—still man is so deep a partaker of God’s nature,
that the truest and deepest part of him is that which is like God
and akin to Him, so that St. Paul tells us, “In God we live, and
move, and have our being ... for we are also his offspring” (Acts
xvii. 28). Now just because our whole blessedness, and our only hope
of returning at last to the perfect image in which God made us, lies
in our trying to get nearer and nearer to God, and to become more
and more like Him, so that our Lord Jesus bids us “Be perfect, even
as your Father which is in heaven is perfect” (Matt. v. 48)—just
because of this, I say, one of the great and merciful laws of God is
that none of us shall ever find any true happiness apart from
goodness; and no one can hope for Rest who does not seek it in the
way of striving to do God’s will. Some one has said that the true
Rest of the soul is attained only when God’s will is our will. So we
are told by Isaiah, that “There is no peace, saith my God, for the
wicked” (Isa. lvii. 21).

And “the wicked” do not mean those only who do great and shameful
sins, which seem very terrible even to us, but all who do not strive
in everything to do God’s will. Let us look a little more closely at
what this will of God’s is.

We are told in the Old Testament what it is. Look at Isaiah i. 16,
17, “Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of thy doing from
before Mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment,
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.”
And again, look at Micah vi. 8, “He hath showed thee, O man, what is
good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.”

And when we come to the New Testament, we find Our Lord Jesus Christ
telling men who those are whom God blesses—what it is to do God’s
will:

    “Blessed are the poor in spirit.
    Blessed are the meek.
    Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness.
    Blessed are the merciful.
    Blessed are the pure in heart.
    Blessed are the peacemakers.” (See Matt. v.)

And while He says that that man only “shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven,” who “doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven”
(Matt. vii. 21), He explains that will to be, “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength; and thy neighbour as thyself.... This do and thou
shalt live” (Luke x. 27, 28). So that if that Rest seems to us a
great and glorious thing to attain, we must seek it in God’s way; we
must try to do God’s will here, that we may rest in perfect harmony
and agreement with that will hereafter.

Is it not a wonderful and beautiful thing that God loves us _so_
much that He will not _let_ us be otherwise than good?—that He will
not cease to remind us by constant unhappiness and restlessness that
we are not fulfilling our highest end, till we strive day by day to
come nearer to Him; so that at last, in that great happy day of
Rest, there will be no more striving; for “we shall be like Him, for
we shall see Him as He is.”

Would you like to hear once more those words, which I daresay you
know so well, and which tell us better than any others have ever
done, _what_ that Rest shall be, and how it shall satisfy all our
wants at last, as “eye hath not seen, nor ear heard.”

Let us turn to the Revelation of St. John, and hear the description
he gives of those who have entered into Rest: “They shall hunger no
more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them,
nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall
feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.” “Behold the
tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them, and they
shall be His people, and God Himself shall be with them, and be
their God.... And there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things
are passed away.” “And there shall be no night there; and they need
no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them
light: and they shall reign for ever and ever.” “Blessed are they
that do His commandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the city” (Rev. vii.
16, 17; xxi. 3, 4; xxii. 5, 14).




                               APPENDIX C
      CONCLUSIONS FROM “A VISIT TO AMERICAN SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES”


“The two features of American education which strike an Englishman
as characteristic, are, the union of all classes in the same schools
and of both sexes in the same colleges; the first being nearly
universal throughout the Northern States; the second still
exceptional, and as regards public opinion, still on probation.

I. That no disadvantages attend the system of mingling all classes
in school can hardly, I suppose, be maintained, though it may be
thought that the advantages greatly preponderate.... So far as
distinctions and consequent separations of rank depend on merely
external circumstances, such as wealth and position, I do not
believe that we gain much by observing them; but when they rest on
real differences of culture and refinement, the case becomes
different, and it does not seem good policy to risk certain loss to
one class, without being sure of securing a more than proportionate
gain to another. In short it seems to me that, if we can mingle
different classes of children in such proportions and under such
conditions as to ensure that the higher standard shall prevail over
the lower, and the tone of all be raised to that of the foremost
few, the measure must be an altogether good one: and I am sure that
to some extent and under some restrictions this may be done: but if
once the inferior standard of refinement is allowed to predominate,
the lower dragging down the higher rather than being raised by it, I
fear that no results gained can pay for the loss accruing.

II. With regard to the joint education of the sexes, it seems to be
pretty clearly established that, in America at least, this system
can prosper for years without any markedly evil effects as to the
morals and manners of the fellow-students, and the evidence of most
professors and teachers goes strongly to show that, on the contrary,
the mutual influence exerted is usually very beneficial.

It seems also to be proved that at least a considerable number of
women can undertake and successfully complete the same course of
study that is usual for men, and that without more apparent
detriment to their health than students of the other sex.

The general issue divides itself into three practical questions:
(_a_) whether men and women shall pursue the same course of study;
(_b_) whether they shall continue it to the same point; and (_c_)
whether their studies, if identical, shall be pursued together....

(_a_) If there is no fundamental education answering to the needs of
common humanity, and, therefore, equally necessary both for men and
women,—it follows that the difference of sex is more radical and
more essential than is the common humanity that underlies it....
Women have, I think, from the earliest times, suffered from the fact
of men’s pretensions to ‘evolve out of their moral consciousness the
idea of’ a woman,—which idea has not by any means always happened to
correspond with the facts that might, perhaps, afford a surer
guide.... It might perhaps be shown that those who, starting with
their ‘evolved idea’ of a woman, deny that the same education may
safely be given to each sex because of the vast essential
differences of nature, are in point of fact more incredulous of the
reality of that difference than those who hold the opposite
views.... The naturalist will not fear to lay meat and hay before
horses and lions, cows and tigers, for neither will the lion be
seduced by the offer of hay, nor will the horse and cow lose their
distinctive characteristics because they both partake of it.....

I do not by any means intend to say that I desire to see the
education of all women made identical with that at present given to
men. It must first be proved that that education is, in truth, the
best and most desirable for the human being, before we can wish to
make it universal. But I do say that what is ultimately decided by
the wisdom of ages to be the best possible form of culture for one
human nature, must be so for another, for our common humanity lies
deeper in all, and is more essential in each, than any differences.

I do not believe that women are to be ‘educated to be wives and
mothers’ in any sense in which it is not equally imperative to
educate boys to be husbands and fathers. I believe that each human
being, developed to his or her best and utmost, will most perfectly
fulfil the duties that God may appoint in each case, and if teachers
and parents have ever before their eyes the aim of making good,
true, and sensible women, I do not fear but they will also train the
best wives and mothers....

(_b_) I confess that I have been surprised in America to find how
much study young women do seem able to accomplish without material
injury, but I do not know how much allowance to make for possible
differences of national constitution.... My own belief, founded
mainly on observation of English girls, is, that in quickness of
intellect they in no way fall behind their brothers, and that during
one or two hours’ study of any subject they would be quite able to
keep up with them, but that after a certain time their physical
powers flag,—sooner perhaps than those of boys,—and that a long
continued strain is apt to be injurious to them. I state this
opinion with great diffidence, however, for many of my fellow-
teachers and friends assert the contrary....

Above all, be the limits of study what they may, let whatever is
done be done _thoroughly_, so that the only too well deserved
reproach of superficiality and incompleteness may at length be
removed from our system of female education. Work half done is not
merely unsatisfactory, it is absolutely injurious to the moral and
mental health of the worker; and I believe it is better to omit any
and every study altogether, than to allow a pupil to skim over it so
as to gather together a string of words thereto relating, with no
solid meaning or knowledge lying beneath.

(_c_) The third question,—whether men and women shall pursue their
studies together,—I do not much care to discuss, for I am by no
means sure of having sufficient data whereon to rest any opinion,
and moreover it seems to me not vital to the general issue. So long
as men and women can each obtain an absolutely good education, it
does not appear very material whether they get it in company or
not,—not material, that is, as regards the education, whatever may
be the case as to the social results.

But one thing does seem to me important, viz. that not merely a
similar but an identical standard should exist for all, whether it
be the many or the few who avail themselves of it. This fixed
standard does exist for men, being represented by the examinations
and degrees of the Universities, and that the same facilities should
be thrown open to women does seem to me vitally important. I have
already said that I should not care to see all women aim at so high
a mark; nor do I believe that, for many years, a large number would
present themselves for examination. But that those who do, by
earnest study, attain to the prescribed standard, should be excluded
from recognition of the fact, seems to be manifestly unjust and
wrong. Universities hold, I suppose, in some sense a national trust,
and that trust involves all possible aid to the cause of education
throughout the land.”




                               APPENDIX D
                    THE EDINBURGH EXTRA-MURAL SCHOOL


The Edinburgh Extra-Mural classes are medical classes conducted by
fully qualified and authorized lecturers other than the University
professors. They prepare students primarily for the examinations of
the Royal Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, but their
certificates are, as a matter of fact, accepted by many examining
bodies. The history of the association of these classes with the
University is—briefly—as follows:

In 1840 Professor Syme begged the Town Council of Edinburgh, who
were then the recognized patrons of the University, to order the
recognition of extra-mural classes, an argument for the innovation
being “that one of the professors was so comparatively inefficient
that many students, after paying his fee and obtaining his
certificate of attendance, went to learn his subject elsewhere.” In
1842 the Town Council ordained that _four_ Extra-Mural classes
should be allowed to count for graduation,—the classes to be chosen
by each student at his discretion. The Medical Faculty of the
University refused to consent to this except on the condition that
any student taking such classes should have a year added to his
curriculum. The Town Council refused this condition, and the
Senatus, supporting the Medical Faculty, referred the matter to the
Court of Law. In 1850 judgment was given against the Senatus; they
appealed to the Inner House, but the judgment was confirmed in 1852.
An appeal was taken to the House of Lords, but again in 1854 the
Town Council gained the day. In 1855 the regulations came into
operation and have ever since remained in force.




                               APPENDIX E
        LETTER TO THE _TIMES_ IN REPLY TO MRS. GARRETT ANDERSON


“TO THE EDITOR OF THE _Times_.

SIR,—I have only just seen the letter from Dr. Garrett Anderson
which you published on the 5th inst., and I venture to beg that you
will allow me to point out my reasons for thinking she has selected
the very worst of all the alternatives suggested, when she advises
Englishwomen to go abroad for medical education.

In the first place, I think that Dr. Anderson assumes greatly too
much in supposing that all the Scotch Universities are permanently
closed to women by the recent decision, especially when notice has
already been given in Parliament that a Scotch member will, at the
beginning of next Session, bring in a Bill to enable those
Universities both to teach and examine female students. Even if no
such Bill were announced, it would, I suppose, be open to every
Scotch University at this moment to obtain the necessary powers
merely by application for the sanction of the Queen in Council, as
it was repeatedly stated, both by the defenders in the late suit and
by those Judges who gave decisions in their favour, that it was
merely the absence of Royal authority for recent changes which
rendered those changes illegal. I think there is very good ground to
hope that this course may be taken by one or more of the other
Universities, even if Edinburgh is content to rest quietly under the
imputations on her good faith which can hardly be effaced in any
other way.

Even if the Scotch Universities are left out of the question, those
of Cambridge and London may well be expected to move in a matter
like the present; or it would hardly seem unreasonable to hope that
some of the surplus revenues in Ireland might be applied in one way
or other to the solution of the present difficulty.

I think, moreover, that Mrs. Anderson concedes very much more than
has yet been proved when she states that the examining bodies, such
as the Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, ‘have the power to
refuse to admit women to their examinations and qualifications.’
That they have the will to do so may, I fear, only be too probable,
but it is at least a very open question whether such power does lie
in their hands. I have been assured on very good authority that this
is not the case, and at any rate I believe no decision to that
effect has ever been given by a Court of Law. Certainly the _primâ
facie_ assumption would be the other way. The Medical Act of 1858 in
no way excludes women from the profession, and two women are
actually registered under its provisions. It is, therefore, hardly
credible, that when all candidates are by the Act required to submit
to certain examinations, the Examining Boards should at their option
be able to turn away all applicants who are not of the male sex, no
mention of any such power being contained in the Act itself; nor, I
think, need we assume even a desire to exclude women on the part of
all the Examining Boards until application has been made to each
individually; and this has never, so far as I am aware, been done at
present.

I trust, therefore, that I have shown that Mrs. Anderson’s advice
that all Englishwomen desiring to study medicine should at once
expatriate themselves is premature in the extreme; I hope further to
show that it is moreover radically erroneous in principle. Even if
it should ultimately be proved (as is at present by no means the
case) that women cannot obtain official examination in this country,
and therefore cannot enter their names on the Register, it would
still, I think, be very far from certain that their best plan was to
seek such examination abroad, seeing that after having spent years
of labour and much money they would, as regards legal recognition,
be exactly as far as ever from gaining their end. Mrs. Anderson says
that they would at least obtain ‘what is denied them in their own
country, a first-class medical education.’ If it were true that such
an education could not be got without going abroad, there would, no
doubt, be much force in this argument, but I submit that this is not
the case. Without stopping to consider the alternatives brought
forward by your correspondent herself—the establishment of a new
school for women or the purchase of one of the existing hospital
schools—either of which seems to me infinitely preferable, Mrs.
Anderson quite overlooks the fact that at this moment medical
classes of first-rate quality can be obtained in Edinburgh in the
Extra-Mural school (many of whose lecturers stand much higher than
the University professors in public estimation),[166] and that with
very little trouble a complete curriculum of medical study could be
there arranged, without altering any of the existing conditions of
affairs. The doors of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary have also been
thrown open to women, though under some restrictions, and excellent
clinical instruction is given to them there by two of the best and
most popular teachers in the city. Can any one doubt that when so
much has been secured, and when every year promises increased
facilities, it is infinitely better that Englishwomen should study
medicine under the direction of their own countrymen, in their own
language, and amid the social and hygienic conditions which will
occur in their own future practice, rather than in a foreign land,
from lecturers who teach in a strange language and in hospitals
where all the arrangements and theories vary from those of this
country, and where even the types of disease may be so far modified
as greatly to lessen the value of the instruction for those who
intend to practise medicine in Great Britain?

Footnote 166:

  S. J.-B. was thinking mainly of Dr. Heron Watson and Dr. G. W.
  Balfour.

In point of fact, the question of medical education in this country
may be already considered solved, even if we grant the necessity of
attending lectures on every subject in the medical curriculum. It
is, however, worth remark that many of the very first men in the
profession are becoming more and more strongly in favour of free
trade in study—_i.e._, of allowing every student to obtain his
knowledge as he pleases, whether from books or from lectures,
requiring only final evidence of satisfactory results. It may be
that on investigation the present system will be found to rest
rather on the ‘vested interests’ of teachers than on the needs of
students, and, if so, the question of medical education for women
will be still further simplified. At present, however, it is not
needful to argue that question. I have shown that provision for the
education of women after the present fashion is to a great extent
already made, and that, for purposes of instruction at least, it is
quite unnecessary for them to expatriate themselves.

With regard to examination, the case seems to me equally clear. No
foreign diploma or degree is at present acknowledged as qualifying
for registration in this country, and though it may be well for
those who covet such ornamental honours to go through the
examinations requisite to obtain them, I cannot see any ground on
which it would be worth the while of most Englishwomen to live for
years abroad to arrive at a result so eminently unpractical. We live
under English law, and to English law we must conform, so far as
lies in our power; if we are arbitrarily precluded from such
compliance it is to the English Government that we must look for a
remedy. I can imagine few things that would please our opponents
better than to see one Englishwoman after another driven out of her
own country to obtain medical education abroad, both because they
know that, on her return after years of labour, she can claim no
legal recognition whatever, and because they are equally certain
that, so long as no means of education are provided at home, only a
very small number of women will ever seek admission to the
profession. I do not say that a woman may not be justified in going
abroad for education if her circumstances make it imperative that
she should as soon as possible enter upon medical practice; but I do
say, and I most firmly believe, that every woman who consents to be
thus exiled does more harm than can easily be calculated to the
general cause of medical women in this country, and postpones
indefinitely, so far as in her lies, the final and satisfactory
solution of the whole question.

It is not an easy thing to remember at all times that

             ‘They also serve who only stand and wait’;

but I do believe profoundly that at this moment the very best
service we can do to the cause in which we are all interested is to
make use of every opportunity open to us in this country to qualify
ourselves as thoroughly as possible for the profession we have
chosen, and then (refusing resolutely to be driven into byways or
unauthorized measures) to demand, quietly but firmly, that provision
for our ultimate recognition as medical practitioners which we have
a right to expect at the hands of the Legislature. Mrs. Anderson
seems to think it hopeless that the present Parliament should
‘promote the interests of an unrepresented class,’ but it must be
remembered that one of the very strongest arguments against granting
the franchise to women has always been that their substantial
interests are and will be provided for by the existing Government,
and a case like the present will certainly afford a crucial test of
the truth of these assertions. If they be true, we cannot doubt that
Parliament will in its next Session make full provision for a case
of such almost unexampled hardship; and if, on the other hand, this
be not done, the argument above referred to can hardly be again
brought forward when the suffrage for women shall again be claimed.

Let me, therefore, conclude, as I began, by protesting as strongly
as lies in my power against this idea of sending abroad every
Englishwoman who wishes to study medicine; let me entreat all such
women to join the class already formed in Edinburgh, the great
majority of whose members are thoroughly of one mind with me in this
matter, and who, having counted the cost, are, like myself,
thoroughly resolved to ‘fight it out on this line,’ and neither to
be driven out of our own country for education nor to be induced to
cease to make every effort in our power to obtain from the
Legislature that measure of justice which we imperatively need, and
which is, in point of fact, substantially implied in the provisions
of the Medical Act of 1858.

                      I am, Sir, yours obediently,
                                                   SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.

15, Buccleuch-place, Edinburgh. Aug. 8.”




                               APPENDIX F
   LETTER FROM THE PRINCIPAL OF EDINBURGH UNIVERSITY, AND S. J.-B.’S
                                 REPLY


                     LADY STUDENTS AT EDINBURGH

                   TO THE EDITOR OF THE _Times_.

SIR,—In your article on the medical education of women, under date
the 23rd inst., you give utterance to reproaches against the
University of Edinburgh, which appear to me to be undeserved, and
which I feel sure you would not have admitted had the full
circumstances of the case been before you. May I be allowed as
briefly as possible to indicate what seems to me to be a correct
view of those circumstances? You say:

“It was next thought that an opening for female medical students
might be found or made at the University of Edinburgh, and a few
were for a time actually received there. The Professors, however,
were greatly divided upon the question, and those who were opposed
to the necessary concessions threw every possible difficulty in the
way of those who wished to make them. After much quarrelling and
litigation, and after transactions which reflected very little
credit on the University, a legal decision adverse to the ladies was
finally given by a bare majority of Scottish Judges, and will remain
binding unless carried by appeal to the House of Lords. Under these
circumstances the ladies were placed in a position of great hardship
and difficulty.”

I acknowledge and regret the hardship and difficulty of the position
in which the ladies referred to have been placed; but this is owing
to the state of the law of the land as interpreted by the Court of
Session, and not to any discreditable transactions on the part of
the University. I admit the manifestation, during the history of
this question, of a partisan feeling both for and against the
medical ladies, to some extent within the University itself, but far
more in the outside public of Edinburgh; but I confidently assert
that the main body of the Professors were not partisans on either
side, and that the general feeling was a desire to give facilities
for medical study to women, so far as this could be done
consistently with the maintenance of academical good order. Again,
it must be remembered that the Professors do not constitute or
govern the University. The governing body is the University Court,
consisting of eight members (of whom only one is a Professor),
headed at present by Sir William Stirling Maxwell, as rector. I
utterly deny the appearance of any unworthy feeling in the way in
which this Court dealt with the questions relating to female medical
education which came before it.

The University was solicited in 1869 to admit ladies, as an
experiment, to the lectures of Medical Professors. There was a
certain amount of opposition to this request, but the feeling of the
majority in each of the constitutive bodies of the University was in
favour of conceding under necessary restrictions what was asked. In
one of the debates on the subject it was indeed suggested that such
a concession should not be made without clearly ascertaining
beforehand whether we had the power of ultimately conferring degrees
upon women, should it be found on experiment that they succeeded in
completing their medical curriculum and in passing the examinations.
But such a delay was deprecated by the supporters of the
application; it was urged that such an inquiry would be premature,
as what was asked for the present was only that trial might be made
of ladies in the capacity of medical students. I need hardly point
out that these representations were dictated by the policy of
“getting in the thin end of the wedge.” And far better for all
parties, more prudent, and more consistent with the dignity of the
University, would it have been, had we resisted this policy, and
refused to take any step before endeavouring to ascertain our powers
in respect of the graduation of women. But the University Court
yielded to an impulse of liberality, and proceeded at once to frame
regulations forbidding mixed classes, but permitting any professor
of medicine to hold separate classes for the medical instruction of
women. The applicants appeared satisfied with what was done for
them; and I must say that it would then have been in their power to
ascertain beforehand how many of the Professors were prepared to
institute classes for them. The ladies must not now throw on the
University all the blame of their disappointment, for they were not
without sufficient warning that only a limited number of such
classes, far short of a full curriculum, would be provided for them.
The regulations said not a word of graduation or of a full course of
study; they were merely permissive, and, as had been requested,
tentative. But the ladies preferred to enter at once upon such
lectures as they could get, trusting, apparently, to the chapter of
accidents. To several of the Medical Professors it would have been
impossible to open full course lectures for ladies, in addition to
their ordinary duties. Some had already on hand the teaching of more
than 300 students, not only by lectures, but also by daily
demonstrations for many hours in the laboratory or dissecting-room.
Others had extensive and important medical practice to attend to,
being sought out by patients from all parts of the country.
Altogether three of the Medical Professors opened classes for
ladies, and of these one has had his health seriously broken down by
the labour, and the two others have both declared that the burden of
such extra duty was more than they could continue to bear.

Under these circumstances, the medical ladies applied that
substitutes might be appointed to lecture to them in the place of
such Professors as might be unable, or unwilling, to give them
instruction. Now, for the first time, the University determined to
seek legal advice. An impartial statement of the case was drawn up
and submitted to the Solicitor-General for Scotland, with the
question whether such measures as the ladies now asked were within
the competency of the University? The opinion of the Solicitor-
General was very strongly given, and went even beyond the exact
point inquired on; it was to the effect that any step tending
towards the graduation of women would be beyond the powers of the
University. This opinion paralyzed the action of the University. The
University Court informed the ladies, on further application from
them, that it was debarred by this opinion from promoting their
graduation until the legality of such graduation could be
established, but it offered to make, in the meantime, arrangements
for their full medical instruction, and it was suggested to the
friends of the ladies that an amicable suit should be instituted
with a view of ascertaining the law. These offers were rejected, and
a suit was brought by the ladies against the Chancellor and
Professors of the University, which has terminated, thus far, in a
judgment that it is not within the powers of the University to
confer a degree upon a woman.

This, Sir, is in brief the history of an unhappy affair, in which
the University certainly made the mistake of consenting to an
experimental arrangement which was strongly urged upon them, and for
this it has been most severely punished. But I doubt if there is
anything in what has occurred which can be called a “transaction
reflecting little credit on the University,” with one exception—
namely, that on one occasion some of the students misbehaved
themselves and insulted the medical ladies. But I must say that this
lamentable occurrence was occasioned by those ladies having
transgressed the regulations of the University Court, and having
joined a mixed class in anatomy under an extra academical lecturer.
This outraged the feeling or prejudices of the students.

In conclusion, Sir, I sincerely sympathize in the earnest appeal
made by Miss Jex-Blake, in the very able letter which forms the
subject of your article, to the Legislature to take up the
consideration of the medical education of women. It is a subject
well worthy the attention of the Legislature, and one which can only
be properly dealt with, as a general social subject, by the
Legislature. Whether or not an University is a suitable institution
for the medical instruction and examination of women is a wide
question on which I will not venture to enter. But, however this be
decided, all other Universities of the United Kingdom must share in
the decision of the University of Edinburgh, and this University
will loyally bear her part in carrying out whatever Parliament may
ordain as expedient. In the meantime, under considerable obloquy,
she can at all events claim to have contributed something in the way
of experience to the elucidation of the question.

                          I am, Sir, your most obedient servant,
                                              A. GRANT, _Principal_.

_August 27._

                   TO THE EDITOR OF THE _Times_.

SIR,—As Sir Alexander Grant, as representative of the University of
Edinburgh, has thought fit to lay before your readers a statement
respecting that University and its lady students which is, to use
the mildest term, imperfect in the extreme, I trust to your justice
to allow me to supplement his narrative with such additional facts
as he has not thought it desirable to make public.

Sir Alexander states that in 1869 the University was “solicited to
admit ladies as an experiment to the lectures of the medical
professors,” and further on speaks of the regulations as being, “as
was requested, tentative.” He implies that all that followed was in
compliance with this request, the claim to graduation being
altogether an afterthought on the part of the ladies. Now, the real
fact is that in March, 1869, I personally did request admission to
medical lectures on these terms, but though the application was
granted by the Senatus it was refused by the University Court on the
express ground of the inexpediency of making any such “temporary
arrangement in the interest of one lady.” About three months later
four other ladies joined me in making a new and altogether different
application—viz., that the University “would sanction the
matriculation of women as medical students, and their admission to
the usual examinations, on the understanding that separate classes
be formed for their instruction.” At the same time (June 21, 1869) I
addressed a formal letter to the Lord Rector of the University
urging the same proposal, and asking that, if separate classes could
be formed, women should be “allowed to matriculate in the usual way,
and to undergo the ordinary examinations, with a view to obtain
medical degrees in due course.”

Our new proposal was successively submitted to all the different
authorities of the University, and received the assent of all—viz.,
of the Medical Faculty, the _Senatus Academicus_, the University
Court, the University Council, and the Chancellor—and, after five
months of consultation and consideration, regulations were, in
November, 1869, framed and issued “for the education of women in
medicine in the University,” these regulations being henceforth
incorporated in the official University Calendar. The first of these
regulations states that “women shall be admitted to the study of
medicine in the University”; in the fourth regulation exceptional
provision is made for “women not intending to study medicine
professionally”; and the sixth regulation ordains that “all women
attending such classes shall be subject to all the regulations now
or at any time in force in the University as to the matriculation of
students, their attendance on classes, examination, or otherwise.”

As the decision by which a bare majority of the Scotch Judges
absolved the University of Edinburgh from all responsibility towards
its matriculated lady students rests on the assumption that the
University Court exceeded its legal powers in passing the above
regulations, it may be worth while to state that the University
Court comprised at that time the then Lord Advocate of Scotland (who
is now Lord Justice Clerk), and also the previous Lord Advocate, Mr.
Gordon, and that the regulations in question were confirmed by the
Chancellor, who happens to be, as Lord Justice General of Scotland,
the highest legal authority in the country. It is certainly a
tolerably striking instance of the “glorious uncertainty of the
law,” that the two highest Judges in the land should concur in an
action which is subsequently declared by a majority of their
brethren to be illegal.

Sir Alexander further goes on to suggest that we might have
ascertained beforehand how many of the Professors would be willing
to hold separate classes for our benefit. The answer to this is
twofold. In the first place, no less than four of the medical
Professors have been changed since my first application was made,
and in every case the change has, as regards our interests, been
for the worse. One of those Professors whose loss we have most to
deplore is Sir James Simpson, whose generous liberality made him
always ready to espouse the weaker cause, and whose strong sense
of justice would have made him always our strenuous supporter in
the councils of the University. Had he been spared, it is, indeed,
more than possible that the whole history of the past four years
would have been different. On these losses it was impossible for
us to calculate; nor could we (before we learnt the full
bitterness of professional rancour) have foreseen that those
Professors who were themselves unable or unwilling to teach us
would absolutely refuse their assent to every one of the
alternative measures by which others might have been enabled to
give us the necessary instructions. It is hardly necessary to
allude to your correspondent’s rather apocryphal statement that
the stupendous labour of giving two lectures a day (which is
habitually undergone by Professors in the Arts Faculty) has ruined
the health of one medical Professor and seriously endangered that
of two more. Suffice it to say that these facts are, to say the
least of it, quite new to me, and that, did space permit, I think
a very different version of the circumstances might be given.

As Sir Alexander has thought fit to refer to the students’ riot in
November, 1871 (though to my mind it is very far from the most
discreditable episode in this history), I think it right distinctly
to deny the interpretation he puts upon the event. It is true that
the riot did occur while we were attending an extra-mural class of
anatomy (we having utterly failed to obtain a private class, though
we had offered a fee of a hundred and fifty guineas for one), but
the rioters were, with few exceptions, not our fellow-students at
all, but a mob of University students who had been summoned together
by a missive circulated in the University class-rooms. The real
truth was that the riot was deliberately got up simply and solely in
the hope of frightening certain friendly infirmary managers from
admitting us to their wards, and perhaps also of frightening us by
showers of foul words and of street mud from pursuing our studies
any further. Fortunately, the chivalrous device was not permanently
successful in either direction.

I pass on, however, to notice the statements made respecting the
recent lawsuit and the events immediately preceding it. Sir
Alexander says that when the University “for the first time sought
legal advice” the authorities obtained an opinion adverse to the
ladies’ claims from the Solicitor-General. As that opinion has never
been published, there is no opportunity for its discussion; but Sir
Alexander appears entirely to forget the fact that an opinion to the
exactly contrary effect was delivered by the Lord Advocate of
Scotland, who takes official precedence of the Solicitor-General,
and that that opinion was not only submitted to the University
Court, but published more than once in the newspapers and elsewhere.
In that opinion the Lord Advocate stated distinctly that he believed
the University to be not only able, but distinctly bound, to
complete the education of those ladies whom it had invited to
matriculate, and that all necessary arrangements for that purpose
could legally be made. It will thus be seen that the above opinions
at any rate neutralized each other, and that, had the University
willed it otherwise, it certainly need not have been “paralyzed” by
one of them.

It is further stated that the University Court informed the ladies
that, by the opinion above referred to, “it was debarred from
promoting their graduation until the legality of such graduation
could be established, but it offered to make, in the meantime,
arrangements for their full medical instruction”; and, further, that
such offer was rejected by the ladies. Both these statements, Sir, I
distinctly deny. I have at this moment the whole correspondence
before me, and I fail utterly to find in it any such offer as that
alleged. The only thing that in any degree gives colour to Sir
Alexander’s assertion is a passage occurring in a Minute of the
University Court of January 8, 1872, which is as follows:

“The Court are of opinion that the question under reference has been
complicated by the introduction of the subject of graduation, which
is not essential to the completion of a medical or other
education.... If the applicants in the present case would be content
to seek the examination of women by the University for certificates
of proficiency in medicine, instead of University degrees, the Court
believe that arrangements for accomplishing this object would fall
within the scope of the powers given to them by section 12 of the
Universities (Scotland) Act. The Court would be willing to consider
any such arrangements which might be submitted to them.”

On receiving a copy of this Minute I pointed out that certificates
of proficiency, not being recognized by the Medical Act of 1858,
would be quite useless to us; but added that, “As the main
difficulty before your honourable Court seems to be that regarding
graduation, with which we are not immediately concerned at this
moment, we are quite willing to rest our claims to ultimate
graduation on the facts as they stand up to the present date, and in
case your honourable Court will now make arrangements whereby we can
continue our education, we will undertake not to draw any arguments
in favour of our right to graduation from such future arrangements,
so that they may at least be made without prejudice to the present
legal position of the University.”

In answer to this letter I was informed that “If the names of extra-
academical teachers of the required medical subjects be submitted by
yourself or by the Senatus, the Court will be prepared to consider
the respective fitness of the persons so named to be authorized to
hold medical classes for women who have in this or former sessions
been matriculated students of the University, and also the
conditions and regulations under which such classes should be held.”

I, of course, replied that we would willingly prepare and submit
such a list (though your readers will notice that this simply
amounted to all the arrangements being thrown upon us students, and
not in any degree made by the Court), but requested first to be
assured that, “though you at present give us no pledge respecting
our ultimate graduation, it is your intention to consider the
proposed extra-mural courses as ‘qualifying’ for graduation, if it
is subsequently determined that the University has the power of
granting degrees to women.” In reply I was informed that the Court
would do nothing of the kind; that we might, if we pleased, take all
the trouble and expense of finding teachers, and might “submit”
their names to the Court, but that in no case would the Court take
any measures for making their teaching of any practical use to us
from a University point of view. Your readers will therefore judge
of what value was the boon that we are alleged to have rejected—I
had almost said the trap that we were fortunate enough to have
escaped!

I am sorry to have paused so long over this point, but the assertion
of your correspondent was so amazing that it seemed essential that
the real facts should be laid before the public. I should be only
too glad if your space would allow you to publish the whole
correspondence, of which I forward a copy for your own perusal.
Should any of your readers desire, however, to ascertain more of the
facts, they will find the correspondence fully given in the notes to
a little book called _Medical Women_, published last year by
Oliphant & Co., of Edinburgh, to which also I may refer for a
detailed account of the whole struggle of the first three years at
Edinburgh.

I notice that Sir Alexander Grant thinks it well to omit the fact
that, when we were at last driven to assert our rights in a court of
law (and I may remark that no proposal for an “amicable suit” was
ever made to me or to any of my fellow-students by the University
authorities, and therefore none was ever “rejected” by us), an
unhesitating decision in our favour was given by the Lord Ordinary,
before whom the case was tried, his Lordship also finding the
Senatus liable for three-fourths of our expenses. The University
refused, however, to accept this verdict, and appealed the case to
the Inner House, where they at length succeeded in obtaining a
judgment in their favour from a bare majority of the Lords of
Session, the whole costs being in this case thrown upon us. Perhaps
you will kindly allow me, however, to quote the following passage
from the judgment of the Lord Justice Clerk, who adhered to the
decision of the Lord Ordinary, and who had himself been Rector of
the University when we were admitted as students.[167] ... I may
mention that an abstract of the whole recent lawsuit has been
published as a sixpenny pamphlet, and may be obtained from Mr.
Elliott, 67 Princes Street, Edinburgh.

Apologizing for so large a trespass on your space,

                            I remain, yours obediently,
                                                   SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE.

Footnote 167:

  The passage has already been quoted, pp. 396-7.




                               APPENDIX G
                PERMANENT MEMORIALS OF SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE


In St. Giles’ Cathedral, Edinburgh,—a brass tablet placed by the
Very Rev. T. W. Jex-Blake:

     “Sacred to the Memory of Sophia Jex-Blake, M.D., by whose
     energy, courage, self-sacrifice and perseverance the Science
     of Medicine and the Art of Healing were opened to Women in
     Scotland.”

In the Edinburgh Hospital for Women and Children, placed by the
Committee and friends,—a medallion of cast bronze mounted on a slab
of verde-antique marble: on the medallion, surrounded by a wreath of
laurel, the family crest and motto:

                      Bene praeparatum pectus.

And below this the inscription:

     “In affectionate remembrance of Sophia Jex-Blake, Founder of
     this Hospital, to whose large courage, insight and constancy
     the admission of Women to the Profession of Medicine in this
     Country is mainly due.”

On the family monument at Ovingdean, near Brighton:

                           SOPHIA LOUISA,
                YOUNGEST CHILD OF THOMAS JEX-BLAKE,
                     AND MARIA EMILY, HIS WIFE.
                        DOCTOR OF MEDICINE,
    FOUNDER IN 1874 OF THE LONDON SCHOOL OF MEDICINE FOR WOMEN,
           AND IN 1888 OF A SIMILAR SCHOOL IN EDINBURGH,
               WHERE SHE ALSO FOUNDED A HOSPITAL FOR
                    WOMEN AND CHILDREN IN 1886.

 “Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.”

In Rotherfield Churchyard, where her body was laid,—a grey granite
cross, bearing the words:

                       SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE, M.D.
                      BORN 21ST JANUARY, 1840.
                       DIED 7TH JANUARY 1912.

     “Then are they glad because they are at rest, and so He
     bringeth them unto the haven where they would be.”




                                 INDEX


 Aberdare, Lord, 404, 427, 433, 443 (footnote), 466, 507.

 Aberdeen University, 226, 413.

 Act, Russell Gurney Enabling. _See_ Table of Contents.

 Action of Declarator, Part II. Chap. XIII.

 _Advocate_, The Boston, 191.

 _Aids to Faith_, 108, 109.

 Aitken, Dr., 500.

 “A. K. H. B.” _See_ Rev. A. K. H. Boyd.

 “Alice,” 88, 105, 106, 107, 168, 185, 204, 205, 207, 230, 258, 421,
    461.

 Allman, Professor, 257, 258, 276, 337.

 Amberley, Viscountess, 279.

 America, Life in. _See_ Table of Contents.

 Anderson, M.D., Mrs. Garrett (Miss Elizabeth Garrett), 117, 118,
    119, 120, 155, 187, 200, 205, 232, 233, 279, 362, 364, 368, 369,
    400, 401, 420, 423, 424, 425, 426, 433, 441, 444 (letter from),
    447, 449, 466, 467, 473 (letter from), 524.

 Anderson, Miss Mary D. _See_ Mrs. Marshall, M.D.

 Andrews, Miss Amelia, 56, 57.

 Anstie, Dr. F. E., 402, 421, 425, 427;
   letters from: 374, 419, 420.

 Anthony, Miss, 477.

 Anstruther, Sir Robert, 360, 403.
   Lady, 360.

 Atlantic House, 193, 194.

 Antioch (at Yellow Springs in Ohio), 168.

 Apothecaries’ Hall of Ireland, 395.
   Society of London, 395.

 Ardmillan, Lord, 392.

 Arthur of Barshaw, Mrs., 514.

 _Athenaeum_, The, 188.

 Atkins, Dr. Louisa, 431, 439, 447.

 Ayrton, M.D., Mrs. Chaplin, 263, 289, 336, 341, 377.

 _A Visit to some American Schools and Colleges_, Part I. Chap.
    XIII., 188, 228, 479.

 B., Miss, 12, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 36.

 Bain, Miss Isabel (Mrs. James Brander), 159, 160, 172, 478, 506.

 Balfour, Dr. G. W., 289, 349, 425, 427, 459, 498, 504, 508, 525.
   Professor J. H., 118, 228-9, 235, 237, 240, 241, 248, 258, 272,
      276, 333, 334, 336, 337, 358.

 Ballantyne, Mrs. _See_ Lady Jenkinson.
   Miss K., 480.

 Barker, Dr. Annie, 279.

 Barlow, Sir Thomas, 460, 483.

 Baynes, Professor, 394.

 Beaconsfield, Lord. _See_ Disraeli.

 Beattie, Mrs., 516.

 Bedford College, 107.

 Begbie, James, 107, 117, 118, 229, 233, 239, 240.

 Beilby, Lady, 525.
   Miss Winifred (Mrs. Frederick Soddy), 525.

 Bell, Dr., 311.

 Bellevue Hospital, 199.

 Bennet, Dr. Henry, 280-1 (letter from).

 Bennett, Professor Hughes, 236, 237, 241, 258, 273, 279, 289, 361,
    425.

 Benson, Miss Ada, 62, 63, 84, 362.
   Henry, 62.

 Bernerhof, 436.

 Berne University, 436.

 Bettws-y-Coed, 45, 60, 86-7, 120, 127, 198, 485.

 Biblical Criticism, S. J.-B.’s views on, 142-4.

 Billing, Dr. A. (father of the profession), 444, 445.

 Birmingham University, 392.

 Birrell, Professor, 394.

 Black, Miss Janet, 498.

 Blackie, Professor J. S., 239, 241, 301, 302, 303.
   Mrs., 239, 510;
     letters from: 302-3, 346.

 Blackwell, Dr. Elizabeth, 199, 200, 204, 205, 207, 264 (letter
    from), 267, 356-7 (letter from S. J.-B.), 362, 364, 367, 368,
    369, 425, 493.
   Dr. Emily, 199, 204, 205, 206, 233.

 _Blackwood’s Magazine_, 435.

 Blake-Humfrey, family, 59, 60.
   Mr. Robert, 59.

 Blyth, Miss Phoebe, 107, 239, 390, 510.

 Bologna University, 221, 239, 240, 241, 358, 370.

 Bonney, Dr., 220, 221.

 Bordighera, 521-3.

 Bosnia, Miss Irby’s work in, 402.

 Boston _Daily Advertiser_, 190.

 Boucherett, Miss, 91.

 Bovell, Dr. Emily (Mrs. Sturge), 279, 377.

 Boyd, Rev. A. K. H., 374.

 Brander, Mrs., 479.
   Mrs. James. _See_ Miss Isabel Bain.

 British Medical Association, 524, 528.

 _British Medical Journal_, 233, 259, 270, 271.

 British Museum, 239, 240, 358.

 Brompton Hospital, 438, 439, 456.

 Brontë, Charlotte, 133, 139, 237.

 Brown, Professor Crum, 268, 269, 270, 273, 335, 382, 418.
   Mrs. Helen, 510.
   Rev. Olympia, 178.

 Brown-Séquard, Professor, 191.

 Buchan, Dowager Countess of, 335, 362.

 Burke and Hare, 497.

 Burn Murdoch, Mr. John, 118, 229.

 Burn Murdoch, Mrs., 106, 110, 112, 118-9, 133, 151, 229, 240, 262.

 Burton, Miss Mary, 510.

 Buss, Miss, 480.

 Bussaco, The Sacred Forest of, 531.

 Bute, The Marquis of, 500.
   Marchioness of, 524.

 Butler, Rev. Canon, 364, 365.
   Mrs. Josephine, 218, 219, 221, 223, 256, 266;
     letters from: 226, 253-4, 364-5.

 Cabot, Dr., 224, 247.

 Caird, Professor Edward, 413.
   Rev. John, Principal, 413.

 Calderwood, Rev. Professor, 239, 273, 302, 310, 320, 346, 361, 509.
   Mrs., 510.

 Call, Dr. Emma, 199, 379.

 Cambridge University, 219, 220, 221, 224-5, 226, 342-3.

 Cameron, M.P., Dr., 410, 411, 412-3 (letter from), 467.

 Campbell, Professor Lewis, 354, 355, 362, 394, 427.
   Mrs., 354, 355.
   Lady Victoria, 524.

 Cancer Hospital, The, 456.

 Candlish, Rev. Dr., 109.

 Cardwell, Lord, 445.

 _Care of Infants, The_, 491.

 Carlingford, Lord, 492.

 Carlyle, Thomas, 161.

 Cathcart, F.R.C.S., Mr. C. W., 460 (footnote), 536.

 Chambers, Dr. King, 255, 256 (letter from), 395, 421, 430, 431,
    442, 460, 464, 472, 493.
   William, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, 244.

 Chaplain, S. J.-B. as, 173, 174, 175, 176-7.

 Chaplin, Miss. _See_ Mrs. Chaplin Ayrton, M.D.

 Charteris, Rev. Professor, 273, 300, 321, 361, 493.

 Children’s Hospital, 456.

 _Christian World_, The, 363.

 Christison, Professor, Sir Robert, 229, 235, 236, 237, 240, 241,
    242, 245, 249, 258, 273, 286, 299, 311, 315, 318, 331, 335, 337,
    345, 418, 449, 508.

 ——’s Assistant, 299, 306, 307, 308, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315.

 _Church Review_, The, 298 (and footnote).

 _Cives Academiae Edinensis_, 264.

 Clark, Dr. Ann, 436, 437, 438, 536 (footnote).

 Clouston, Dr. (Sir Thomas), 460, 486, 526.

 Cobbe, Miss Frances Power, 152 (letter from), 158, 171, 178, 243,
    266, 320.

 Colenso, Bishop, 141, 142, 145, 146.

 Colston, Treasurer, 320.

 Commune, The, 326.

 _Contemporary Review_, The, 442.

 Cordery, Miss Bertha. _See_ Mrs. S. R. Gardiner.
   Miss Emma, 66, 153, 155, 528.
   Miss Henrietta. _See_ Mrs. T. W. Jex-Blake.
   James, 66, 473, 528.
   Family, 66, 83, 252, 389, 421.

 _Courant_, The Edinburgh, 291.
   Evening, 312, 315.

 Cowan, Lord Provost of Edinburgh, 389.

 Cowell, Dr., 419.

 Cowper Temple, M.P., W. (Lord Mount Temple), 409 (letter and
    telegram from), 410-411 (letter from), 412, 414, 429, 430, 433,
    434, 467.

 Coxe, M.D., Sir James, 300.

 Craig, Miss Agnes, 510.

 Craik, Mrs., 55.

 Craufurd, Professor, 241, 258, 273, 360.

 Critchett, F.R.C.S., George, 431, 432.

 Crocker, Miss, 163.

 Cropper, James, 504.

 Crudelius, Mrs., 106.

 Cubitt, Miss Henrietta (Mrs. Orr), 106.
   Miss Jane, 37, 38, 366.
   Maria Emily. _See_ Mrs. Jex-Blake.
   Mrs. P., 151.
   Thomas of Honing Hall, 2.
   family, 59.

 Dahms, Dr. Anna, 335, 377.

 _Daily News_, The, 421-2, 443.

 _Daily Review_, The Edinburgh, 119, 236, 263, 293, 294.

 Davies, Miss Emily, 118, 219.

 Deas, Lord, 392.

 De Dreux, Miss, 107, 108, 124.

 Degrees, American, 189, 190, 322.

 Derby, Hasket, 192.

 Dimock, Dr. Susan, 190 (and footnote), 191.

 Disraeli, Benjamin, 407, 408, 409, 412.

 Dispenser, S. J.-B. as, 173.

 Dispensary, S. J.-B.’s, 459, 460, 461, 462, 468, 486, 487, 495,
    494.

 Driving Tours, Part III. Chap. VI.

 Dublin University, 226.

 Duggan, Rev. Father, 529-30.

 Dunham, Great, 59, 63.

 Du Pre, Miss Ursula, 221-3, 229, 230 (and footnote), 242, 247, 252,
    262, 279, 287, 295 (letter), 328, 329, 351, 362, 386-7 (letter),
    433, 437, 463, 464, 467, 468, 471, 472, 476-8 (letters to), 481,
    482, 486, 489, 490, 495, 497, 507, 509 (letter to), 516, 528.

 Durham University, 392-4.

 Edinburgh Extra-Mural School, 276-9, 285, 286, 330, 331, 491, 492,
    496. Appendix D.

 Edinburgh, First visit to, Part I. Chap. IX.

 Edinburgh Hospital for Women and Children, 476 (footnote), 487.

 Edinburgh Royal Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, 309, 330, 395,
    491, 492.

 Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. _See_ Table of Contents.

 Edinburgh School of Medicine for Women, 496-502, 504, 507, 508.

 Edinburgh University. _See_ Table of Contents.

 Edington, Mrs., 510.
   Miss, 510.

 Eggishorn, The, 375.

 Ellaby, Dr. Charlotte, 474.

 Eliott-Lockhart, Miss C. H., 508, 528.

 Emerson, Edith, 166.
   Edward, 166.
   Ellen, 166.
   R. W., 161, 161-2 (letter from), 166-7.
   Mrs., 166-7.

 Employment of Women, Society for the, 81.

 Enabling Bill (Cowper Temple, _i.e._ Bill “to remove doubts”), 403,
    404, 410; (Russell Gurney), 434.

 _Englishwoman’s Year Book_, 494.

 “Englishwomen’s Educational Union,” 125, 127.

 _Essays and Reviews_, 109.

 Evans, Mrs. De Lacy. _See_ Mrs. Russel.
   Miss M. J. (Mrs. Heath), 60, 70, 73, 82, 151.
   family, 59, 61.

 Fawcett, Rt. Hon. Henry, 479.

 Findlay, J. R., 233, 262, 320.

 Fitch, J., 464.

 Foreign Degrees Bill, 429, 433.

 Forsyth, —, Q.C., M.P., 433.

 Forster, Rt. Hon. W. E., 404.

 Fortingal, 516.

 Foster, Mrs. A. B., 510.

 _Fortnightly Review_, The, 293, 429.

 Fraser, Professor Alexander, 234, 240.

 Fraser, Sherriff Patrick, 33, 332, 334, 335, 358.

 Galloway, LL.D., Miss Janet, 501.

 Gamgee, Dr. Arthur, 278.

 Gardiner, Professor S. R., 531.
   Mrs., 66, 431, 490, 503, 528, 531.

 Garrett, Miss Elizabeth. _See_ Mrs. Garrett Anderson.

 Gaskell, Mrs., 154.

 Geddes, Mrs., 510.

 George Eliot, 455.

 Gifford, Lord Ordinary, Chap. XIV. _passim_, 377, 379, 381, 391,
    392, 403.

 Gilbert, Thomas, 310, 332, 333.

 Gladstone, Rt. Hon. W. E., 405, 409, 465.

 _Glasgow Herald_, The, 315.

 _Glasgow Mail_, 412.

 Glasgow University, 221, 226, 246, 413.

 Glencorse, Lord. _See_ Inglis.

 Gordon (Lord Advocate), 249, 287, 412.

 Goschen, G. J. (First Viscount), 252.

 Göttingen, 124-6, 132.

 Gover, Mrs., 27.

 Grand Ducal Institute, 126-8, Chap. XI. _passim_.

 Grant, Sir Alexander, 235, 241, 244, 247, 249, 250, 252, 258, 279,
    335, 401, Appendix F.
   Lady, 235, 236.

 Granville, Earl, 444.

 Greig, David, 320.

 Grévy, President, 325.

 Grote, George, 47.

 _Guardian_, The, 158, 274.

 Gull, Sir William, 444.

 Gunton, Rev. Thomas, 323.
   Mrs., 323, 513.

 Gurney, Mr. Russell, 405, 406, 407 (letter from), 409, 410, 411,
    429, 434.

 Guthrie, Rev. Dr., 109, 344, 346.

 Handyside, Dr. P. D., 278, 279, 285, 287-9 (letter from), 291, 292,
    298.

 Harris, Miss Mary, 90, 101.

 Hayden, Dr., 439.

 Harvard University, 168, 171, 191, 192, 195, 196, 199, 204, 206,
    239.

 Heath, Mrs. _See_ Miss M. J. Evans.

 Heaton, Miss Martha (Mrs. Hilhouse), 84.

 Henderson, Professor, 235, 237.

 Heywood, Mr., 444.

 Hidber, Professor, 438.

 Hill, Miss Miranda, 90, 101, 105, 125, 344, 362.
   Miss Octavia, 84-94, 96, 98, 99, 101, 108, 110, 112, 116, 125,
      133, 181, 199, 238, 258, 266, 468, 538.

 Hill, Mrs., 87, 89, 92.

 Hill, Mrs. A. R., 510.
   Dr., President of Harvard, 168, 171, 190-1.

 Hill Burton, Mrs., 320.

 Hillsdale College, 168, 171.

 Hoare, Miss Elizabeth, 161.

 Hodgson, Professor William B., 361, 399 (letter from), 400, 401,
    402.
   Mrs., 510.

 Hoggan, Dr., 292, 346.

 Holmes, Dr. Oliver Wendell, 191.

 Honing Hall, 2, 60, 151.

 Hope, Dr., 269.

 Hope Scholarship, 269, 295, 317, 418.

 Hope of Drylaw, Mrs., 320.

 Hopgood, James, 442, 443.
   Mrs., 442.

 Houghton, Lord, 402.

 Hughes, Miss. _See_ “Alice.”

 Hughes, Thomas, 405.

 Humphry, M.D., Sir George, 220.

 Huxley, T. H., 383, 384, 416, 418.

 Hubbard, Miss Louisa, 402, 494.

 Hutton, R. H., 444.

 Inglis, Chancellor, Lord Glencorse, Lord Justice General of
    Scotland, 240, 260, 269, 332, 396.

 Innes, Professor Cosmo, 239, 240, 361.

 Irby, Miss Pauline, 402, 421, 422, 432, 433, 461-2, 465, 495, 498.

 “Irish Brigade,” 292, 293, 294.

 Irish University, 435.

 Irving, Sir Henry, 458.

 Jack, Professor, 315.

 Jagannadham, Dr. Annie, 504.

 James, Professor William, 531.

 _Jane Eyre_, 108, 111, 113.

 Jenkin, Professor Fleeming, 239, 241, 271 (letter from), 359, 360,
    361.

 Jenkinson, Lady (Mrs. Ballantyne), 151, 159, 180, 229, 247, 258,
    481, 487, 528.

 Jenner, Sir William, 445.

 Jenny Geddes, 297 (footnote).

 Jerviswoode, Lord, 348, 392.

 Jessel, Rt. Hon. Sir G., 444.

 Jex-Blake, Thomas, 1-17, 20, 21, 28, 29, 30, 37, 41, 45, 48, 50,
    52, 59, 63, 66, 67, 74, 88, 91, 108, 122, 140, 146, 148, 150,
    158, 159, 160, 177, 194, 202, 203, 205, 207, 208, 213, 283, 389,
    464.
   Letters from: 15, 26, 30, 35-6, 39-41, 67-8, 70-1, 72, 79, 88-9,
      112, 185-6, 252-3, 385-6.
   Letters to: 19, 20, 22-3, 36-7, 68-70, 71-2.

 Jex-Blake, Mrs., 1, 2, 3, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 28, 29,
    31, 32, 37, 39, 42, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56, 58, 59, 65, 66, 70, 74,
    81, 82, 85, 88, 91, 93, 96, 108, 110, 111, 113, 120, 124, 135,
    137, 139, 140, 147, 148, 158, 168, 180, 182, 185, 187, 201, 208,
    213, 214, 217, 219, 224, 226, 237, 238, 239, 255, 265, 267, 279,
    306, 310, 323, 365, 366, 389, 391, 407, 421, 423, 439, 445, 456,
    470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 518.
   Letters from: 4-5, 13-4, 15, 16, 25, 30, 35, 41, 43, 44, 45, 73,
      89, 111, 112, 113, 121, 134, 137, 138, 139-40, 145-6, 159-60,
      185, 279, 309, 310, 342, 363, 375, 384-5, 391, 438, 440, 471.
   Letters to: 5, 6, 19, 24, 47, 48, 81, 86-7, 97-8, 114-5, 121,
      121-4, 129-30, 131, 141-5, 163, 164-6, 172-5, 176-7, 184, 193-
      4, 194-5, 197-8, 200-1, 203, 204-7, 365-6, 380, 459-60, 471.

 Jex-Blake, Very Rev. T. W., 1, 4, 14, 16, 28, 45, 66, 69, 71, 185,
    202, 208, 219, 229, 240, 316, 320, 405, 417, 438, 457, 513.
   Letters from: 169-70, 266-7, 303-4, 307-8, 353-4, 375, 384.
   Letters to: 4, 170-1.

 Jex-Blake, Mrs. T. W. (Miss H. Cordery), 49, 66, 171, 185, 353,
    354, 384, 438.

 Jex-Blake family, 171, 185.

 Jex-Blake, Miss C. A., 1, 3, 4, 9, 13, 14, 15, 28, 29, 38, 39, 43,
    56, 60, 85, 87, 106, 119, 158, 177, 194, 198, 207, 214, 438,
    528.
   Letters from: 43-4.
   Letters to: 176, 484-5.

 Jex-Blake, Elinor (Mrs. Miles), 44, 58, 60, 61, 73, 75, 82-83, 110,
    113, 156, 459.
   Ferrier, 58, 59, 73.
   Miss Kate (Mrs. Forde), 44.
   Miss Sarah (Mrs. Brown), 42, 59, 60, 61, 73, 82, 385.
   William, of Swanton Abbots, 2.

 Jowett, Professor Benjamin, 235.

 ‘Juryman, A,’ 316-7 (letter from).

 Keiller, Dr., 279, 330.

 Keily, Miss S. E., 523.

 Kelland, Professor, 239, 258.

 Kimberley, Lord, 444.

 King’s and Queen’s College of Physicians, Ireland, 435, 436, 438.

 Kingsley, Charles, 63.
   Henry, 294.
   Mrs. Henry, 292, 294, 321, 373, 461.

 Kinnear, Lord, 508.

 Kirkland, Miss E. S., 510.

 Knowles, James, 502.

 Knox, Dr. Robert, 497.

 Kunz, Madame, 510.

 _Lancet_, The, 280, 282, 283, 319, 336, 337, 362, 383.

 Laurence, Samuel, 76, 187, 205.

 Law (Lord Provost of Edinburgh), 296, 299, 304, 305, 322.

 “Lawyer, A” (letter from), 317.

 Laycock, Professor, 236, 237, 241, 248, 259, 273, 286, 313.

 Lectureship on Midwifery (S. J.-B.’s), 504.

 Lee, Dr., 460.

 Leith Hospital, 479.

 Lister, Professor (Lord), 273, 389.

 Liston, Professor, 258, 335.

 Littlejohn, Dr. (Sir Henry), 286, 296, 336, 337, 362, 383.

 Liveing, Professor, 220.

 _Liverpool Mercury_, The, 380.

 London Hospital, 441.

 —— School of Medicine for Women, 421-2, 429, 433, 443, 445, 449,
    464, 502.

 —— University, The, 117, 219, 441, 444, 445, 448, 456, 479.

 Lorimer, Professor, 239, 240, 241, 258, 361.
   Letters from: 249-50, 331-2.

 Lorimer, Mrs., 239, 250, 251, 332.

 Loring, —, 195.

 Lothian, Marquis of, 507.

 Lowe, M.P., Rt. Hon. Robert (Viscount Sherbrooke), 507.

 Lubbock, Sir John, 404, 444.

 Macadam, Dr. Stevenson, 495.

 Macara, Mrs., 516.

 Macdonald, Dr. Angus, 459.

 McDougall, Dr. Mary, 537.

 Macgregor, Dr. Jessie, 525.

 Mackenzie, Dr. J., letters from: 321, 373-4.

 Maclagan, Professor Sir Douglas, 237.

 M‘Laren, Dr. Agnes, 320, 321, 323, 324 (letter from), 325, 341,
    362, 375, 385, 386 (letter from), 387, 390, 392, 394, 410, 413,
    426, 471, 528.
   Duncan, M.P., 296, 304, 346, 414, 416.
   Mrs. Priscilla Bright, 363, 510.

 Macmillan and Co., 168, 187, 188, 253, 491.

 Macmillan, Mr. Alexander (letter from), 218.

 M‘Pherson, Professor, 239, 258.

 Mair, Miss S. E. S., 510.

 Manchester, Projected Ladies’ College, 152-6, 200.

 Mann, Mrs. Horace, 166.

 Mannheim, Part I. Chap. XI., 324, 499.

 Marshall, M.D., Mrs. Mary, 289, 319, 340, 351.

 Martineau, Harriet, 320, 335 (letter from).
   James, 216, 362.

 Massachusetts General Hospital, 191, 192, 196.
   Eye and Ear Infirmary, 191, 192.

 Massingberd Mundy, Miss, 292, 335, 377, 378-9 (letter from).

 Masson, Professor David, 106, 221, 226, 228, 231, 234, 239, 241,
    243, 245, 250, 258, 264, 270, 272, 273, 274, 305, 309, 345, 346,
    360, 361, 363, 388, 407, 411, 425, 428, 437, 449, 499, 524.
   Letters from: 228-9, 247-9, 273, 408, 409, 411-12.

 Masson, Mrs., 263 (letter from), 428.

 Masson family, 306.

 Matriculation (First) of women in Edinburgh University, 264.

 Maurice, Frederick Denison, 63, 66, 70, 110, 203.

 _Medical Women_, 223, 224, 265, 380, 402, 421, 479, 491, 492, 493.

 Medicine as a career, 182, 183, 184, 187.

 Menzies, Mr. and Mrs., 516.

 Ministry, thoughts of, 177, 182.

 Middlesex Hospital, 456.

 Mitchell, Miss Maria, 163.

 Millar, Mrs., 510.

 Millar, Mrs. Grant, 510.
   White, 310, 325, 334, 357, 382, 392, 410.

 Milne Murray, Dr., 504.

 Monck Mason, Miss Dora. _See_ Mrs. Burn Murdoch.

 Moore, Dr., 52.

 Moorfields Hospital, 456.

 Moorhead, Dr. Alice (Mrs. Langwill), 508.

 Moncrieff, Lord Advocate (Lord Justice Clerk), 244, 250, 252, 332,
    396, 413.

 Moray, The Countess of, 524.

 Morse, Rev. T. C. D., letter from, 132, 153, 156, 158.

 Mount Temple, Lord. _See_ Cowper Temple.

 Muirhead, Professor, 239, 240, 241, 248, 338.

 Munro Ferguson, Lady Helen, 524.

 Mure, Lord, 313, 314, 392, 396.

 Music, 138.

 Myers, Frederick, 474.

 “National Association,” 335, 345, 491, 509.

 New England Hospital for Women and Children, 162, 165, 172, 188,
    189, 197, 206, 285.

 New York Infirmary, 204.

 Newman, Professor, 223 (letter from), 223.

 Niagara, 167, 168.

 Nichol, Mrs., 300, 303 (letter from), 320, 354, 464, 510.

 Nicholson, Dr. Alleyne, 276-7 (letter from).

 Nicolson, Alexander, 249, 273, 336 (letter from), 357-8.

 _Nineteenth Century, The_, 402, 442, 449, 502.

 Norton, Arthur, 256, 420, 421, 426, 428, 447, 457.

 Oakeley, Professor Sir Herbert, 240.

 Oberlin College, 168, 171.

 O’Halloran, The, 293, 294.

 Ormidale, Lord, 392.

 Orr, General (Captain), 106.

 Orr, Mrs. (Miss Henrietta Cubitt), 106.

 Orr, Miss Margaret, 106, 110, 229, 230.

 Orr Ewing, —, M.P., 410, 411.

 Osler, Smith, 444, 479-80.

 Padua University, 241.

 Paget, Sir James, 431, 444.

 Palaus, Fräulein von (Baroness), 127, 130, 133, 134, 136, 137, 144,
    147, 148.

 _Pall Mall, The_, 195, 300.

 Palmer, Sir Roundell (Lord Selborne), 241.

 Paris University, 228, 229, 235, 239, 279, 353, 354, 377, 400.

 Paton, Miss M. G., 510.

 Peabody, Miss, 161, 166.

 Pechey, Dr. Edith (Mrs. Pechey Phipson), 254, 256, 257, 262, 267,
    269, 270, 271, 272, 274, 275, 289, 293, 303, 307, 311, 325, 336,
    341, 364, 365, 366, 377, 378, 382, 384, 418, 424, 425, 431, 432,
    434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 444, 449, 459, 464, 465, 478, 486,
    492, 493, 505, 514, 518, 519, 528.
   Letters from: 317-9, 359-60, 362, 383.

 Pechey, Rev. William, 275, 279, 493.

 Peel Ritchie, Dr., 460, 525.

 Phin, Rev. Dr., 249, 260.

 Phipson, H. M., 505, 528.

 Playfair, Professor (Sir Lyon), 237, 240, 241, 250, 251, 411, 412,
    413, 414, 416, 428.
   Letters from: 241-2.

 Plumptre, E. H. (Dean of Wells), 63, 64, 69, 113, 150, 152, 155.

 Portal, Miss Lucy (letter from), 26-7.

 Provosts (Lord) of Edinburgh:
   Chambers, 244.
   Law, 296, 299, 304, 305.
   Cowan, 389.

 Professional Examination, 330.

 Puerperal Fever, S. J.-B.’s thesis on, 437.

 Pulsford, Rev. Dr., 109, 110, 112, 145.

 _Punch_, 44, 275, 356, 414, 487.

 Putnam-Jacobi, Dr. M., 224, 424.

 Quain, Dr., 445.

 Queen Margaret College, 501.

 Queen Mary, H.M., 487.

 Queen Victoria, H.M., 138, 259, 286.

 Rainy, Rev. Principal, 109.

 Raleigh, Rev. Dr., 160.

 Ramsay, Admiral, Sir William, 320.

 Raymond, Dr., 166.

 Reade, Charles, 291, 435, 498.

 Recorder of London. _See_ Gurney, Russell.

 Reid, W. L., 336.

 Rendel, Lady, 402.

 Richmond and Gordon, Duke of, 433.

 Richter, Dr. Otto, 376.

 Riot at Surgeons’ Hall, Part II. Chap. VIII.

 Ripon, Marquis of, 389, 466, 479.

 Ristori, 458.

 Robson, W., 334, 347.

 _Robertson’s Sermons_, 139, 142, 230, 382.

 Rogers, Professor, 164, 195.
   Mrs., 162, 178.

 Rose, Mrs. Hugh, 510.

 Royal Free Hospital, 442, 444, 456.

 Royal Infirmary, 286, 287, 288, 296, 298, 299, 300, 308, 340, Chap.
    XII. _passim_.

 Rukhmabai, Dr., letter from, 493, 504.

 Rumbling Bridge Hotel, 516.

 Russel, Alexander, 233, 294, 305, 332, 340, 349, 380.
   Mrs. (Mrs. de Lacy Evans), 236, 243, 263, 289, 292, 307, 332,
      340, 341, 349, 492.

 Russell, Lord Arthur, 444.

 Sackermena, 6-10, 18, 50, 120, 335, 447.

 _Sadie’s Poems_, 230, 242, 488.

 St. Andrews University, 119, 221, 225, 226, 354, 392, 394, 395,
    413, 417, 492, 507, 508, 509.

 St. Giles’ Cathedral, 296, 297.

 St. Louis College, 168, 171.

 St. Mary’s Hospital, 255, 256.

 Salamanca University, 241.

 Salzmann, Dr., 215, 256, 395.

 Sanders, Professor, 273.

 Sanderson, Dr., 292, 313.

 Sandon, Viscount, 429, 433, 434.

 Saville, Dr. Lillie, (letter from) 390, 488, 528.

 Scharlieb, Mrs., 478, 524.

 Schoolfellow’s criticisms of S. J.-B., 33-4.

 School Board (Edinburgh), 389.

 Schultz, Fräulein, 437.

 _Scotsman_, The, 119, 233, 234, 249, 253, 262, 275, 298, 305, 306,
    310, 312, 313, 316, 322, 337, 342, 348, 401, 412, 450, 465.

 Scott, Dr. Sam., 148.

 Scott Moncrieff, Sir Colin, 500.

 Selborne, Lord (Sir Roundell Palmer), 241, 404, 434.
   Lady, 405.

 Serajevo, 432, 435.

 Sewall, Dr. Lucy, 161, 162, 163, 165, 172, 173, 174, 176, 177, 181,
    182, 183, 187, 193, 197, 198, 201, 202, 205, 206, 215, 229, 230,
    237, 238, 302, 327, 328, 329, 377, 378, 379, 448, 459, 462, 468,
    476, 506.
   Letters from: 162, 175, 186, 215, 405.
   Letters to: 16 (footnote), 199, 213, 214-5, 216, 219, 221, 224,
      232-3, 246, 255, 259, 267, 327, 377-8, 379, 464, 487.

 Sewall, Hon. Samuel, 162, 177, 205, 259, 506.

 _Sewall, The Prophecy of Samuel_ (_1697_), 162, 506-7.

 Shaftesbury, Earl of, 363, 427, 434.

 Shairp, Professor, 226.

 Shandwick Place University Classes for Women, 106.

 Sherbrooke, Viscount. _See_ Lowe, Rt. Hon. Robert.

 Shewen, Dr. Alfred, 404.

 Shove, Dr. Edith, 435, 444, 479.

 Sibbald, Dr. (Sir John), 525.

 Sidgwick, Professor Henry, 226, 245, 342, 343.
   Letters from: 219, 221, 245, 225-6.

 Simon, J., 389, 429, 430.

 Simpson, Sir James, 221, 233 (footnote), 234, 237.

 Skelton, Mrs., 510.

 Slaves and Slavery, 168, 171, 182 (footnote).

 Sleighing, 197.

 Smith, Professor Piazzi, 240.
   Southwood, Dr., 96.
   Dr. William, 444.

 Social Science Congress, 402.

 Society of Apothecaries, 232, 255.

 Society for Employment of Women, 81.

 Soddy, Mrs. Frederick. _See_ Beilby, Miss Winifred.

 Somerville, Mr. Robert, 498.

 Spence, Professor, 236, 237, 258, 498.

 _Spectator_, The, 270, 274, 295, 399, 401, 504.

 Stansfeld, Rt. Hon. Sir James, 274, 309, 381, 388, 389, 402, 404,
    406, 410, 414, 429, 432, 433, 444, 445, 446, 449, 491, 502.
   Letters from, 407-8, 409, 441-2, 443, 507.

 Stansfeld, Mrs. Caroline, 441.

 _Stationer_, The, 188.

 Stevenson, Miss Flora, 320, 325.
   Miss Louisa, 325, 390, 510.
   R. L., 340 (letter from).
   Professor, 240, 258.

 Stirling Maxwell, Sir William, 360, 411.

 Storar, Dr., 445.

 Struthers, Dr., 497.
   Professor, 273.

 Stuart, M.P., James, 225, 226, 343.
   Letter from, 342-3.

 Suffrage, Woman, 309, 323, 327, 465, 485.

 Syme, Professor, 258, 274, 295, 399, 401, 504.

 Symes Thompson, Dr., 438.

 Tait, Professor, 239, 240, 241, 258, 270, 273, 279, 335, 360, 416.
   Letter from, 338-9.

 Tait, Lawson, 432.

 Taylor, Mrs., 59.
   Mrs. Peter, 161.

 Taylour, Miss, 323.

 Teaching, Comparison of English and American, 169, 170.

 Teed, Mrs., 13, 17, 18, 35, 46, 48, 53, 55, 69, 71, 133.
   Miss, 13, 16, 46, 175.

 Temple, Miss, 185.

 Tennyson, Alfred, 63, 345.

 Terry, Miss Ellen, 458.

 Thackeray, S. J.-B.’s likeness to, 76.

 Thomson, Professor A. J., 500.
   Walter, 380.
   Sir Wyville, 416, 418.

 Thorne, Mrs. Isabel, 256, 260, 268, 289, 292, 307, 311, 322, 325,
    336. 389, 395, 396, 402, 418, 420, 425, 431, 434, 435, 436, 447,
    448, 449, 462, 467, 505.
   Letter from, 253.

 Thornton, Mrs., 77.

 _Times_, The, 108, 270, 273, 286, 375, 400, 401, 417, 421, 472,
    495.

 Trayner, Lord, 308, 494, 495.
   Mrs. (Lady), 494, 495.

 Trench, R. C. (Archbishop), 63, 64, 216.

 Tulloch, Principal, 119, 355, 413, 427.

 Turner, Professor (Sir William), 235, 237, 241, 247, 248, 258, 273,
    293, 336, 389.

 Tutorship (mathematical), 67-73.

 Tweedie, Mrs. Alec., 63 (footnote).

 Tyng, Dr., 166.

 Tytler, Professor, 239.

 Unitarianism, 109, 153, 154, 179, 180 (footnote).

 University. _See_ Aberdeen, Bologna, Cambridge, etc.

 Universities Commission, 508.

 Universities (Scotland) Bill, 507.

 Unwin, Miss Hermione, 480-1.

 Unwin, Mrs. S. P., 84, 124, 202, 328, 329, 351.
   Letters to, 100, 130-1, 149-50, 156-8, 167-8, 184.
   Letters from, 186.

 Unwin, S. P., 158, 481.
   Letter from, 186.

 _Villette_, 126 (and footnote).

 Waldegrave, Dowager Countess, 373.

 Walker, Miss, 279.
   Miss Lucy. _See_ Mrs. Unwin.
   Dr. Jane, 524.

 Watson, Dr. (Sir Patrick Heron), 278, 284, 286, 340, 349, 425, 459,
    466, 467, 472, 493, 509.
   Letters from, 287-9, 332.

 Wedderburn, Sir David, 360, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407.

 Welstood, Mrs., 510.

 Weisse, Herr Heinrich, 107.

 Westminster Hospital, 419.

 Wigham, Miss Eliza, 510.

 Wilberforce, William, 182.

 Williams, Mrs., 63.
   Mrs. Agnes. _See_ Miss Woodhouse.

 Wilson, Professor John, 239, 240, 258, 272, 273, 292, 293, 310,
    332-3, 335, 359.

 Wilson, Mr. Robert, 292, 293 (and footnote).
   Letter from, 293-4.

 Windydene, 390, Part iii. Chap. vii.

 Wolstenholme, Miss. _See_ Mrs. Wolstenholme Elmy.

 _Woman Hater, The_, 291, 435, 498.

 Women’s Medical College, New York, 204, 206.

 Women, Society for Employment of, 81.

 _Women’s Work and Women’s Culture_, 221, 223, 224, 243, 253, 266.

 Wood, Dr. Alexander, 287, 335, 336, 337.

 Woodhouse, Miss Agnes (Mrs. Williams), 64, 65, 70, 74, 78, 83, 107.

 _Words for the Way_, 158.

 “Working men, A few,” 321.

 Wyld, A. G., 510.

 Wyld, Mrs. Margaret, 510.
   Letter from, 308.

 Wyld, R. S., 320.


 Yarrow, 516.

 Young, Lord Advocate, 310, 312, 313, 313, 331, 335, 356, 413.

 Zurich University, 190, 235, 239, 278, 279, 353, 354.


 GLASGOW: PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO.
                                 LTD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       MACMILLAN’S NEW BOOKS

=Recollections.= By VISCOUNT MORLEY, O.M. 2 vols. 8vo. 25s. net.

=Pitt.= By LORD ROSEBERY. A Library Edition. With Photogravure
    Portraits. 8vo.

=Occasional Addresses=: 1893 to 1916. By the Rt. Hon. H. H. ASQUITH,
    M.P. 8vo. 6s. net.

=Sir William Ramsay, K.C.B., F.R.S.=: Memorials of his Life and
    Work. By Sir WM. A. TILDEN, F.R.S. With Portraits. 8vo.

=A Sporting and Dramatic Career.= By ALFRED E. T. WATSON (“Rapier”),
    Editor of _The Badminton Magazine_. 8vo. 12s. net.

=Life of Lord Lister.= By SIR RICKMAN J. GODLEE, Bart., K.C.V.O.,
    F.R.C.S. With Portraits and other Illustrations. 8vo. 18s. net.

=Moments of Vision and Miscellaneous Verses.= By THOMAS HARDY. Crown
    8vo. 6s. net.

    =My Reminiscences.= By SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE. Illustrated.
    Extra Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=Nationalism.= By SIR RABINDRANATH TAGORE. Extra Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d.
    net.

      CONTENTS.—Nationalism in the West. Nationalism in Japan.
      Nationalism in India.

=Folk-Lore in the Old Testament.= By SIR J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L.,
    author of “The Golden Bough,” “Totemism and Exogamy,” etc. 3
    vols. 8vo.

=Priest of the Ideal.= By STEPHEN GRAHAM, author of “With the
    Russian Pilgrims to Jerusalem,” etc. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=About Winchester College.= By A. K. COOK. To which is Prefixed _De
    Collegio Wintoniensi_ by ROBERT MATHEW. With Illustrations. 8vo.
    18s. net.

=Re-Incarnations.= A New Volume of Poems. By JAMES STEPHENS, author
    of “The Crock of Gold,” “Songs from the Clay,” etc. Crown 8vo.
    3s. 6d. net.

=Per Amica Silentia Lunae.= By WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS. Crown 8vo. 4s.
    6d. net.

=A History of the French Novel.= By GEORGE SAINTSBURY, M.A. and Hon.
    D.Litt.Oxon, late Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature
    in the University of Edinburgh. Vol. I. from the beginning to
    1800. 8vo. 18s. net.

=Political Portraits.= By CHARLES WHIBLEY. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

=The English Poets.= Selections with Critical Introductions by
    various writers. Edited by THOMAS HUMPHRY WARD, M.A., Vol. V.
    LATER 19TH CENTURY. Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d.

=Six Women and the Invasion.= By GABRIELLE and MARGUERITE YERTA.
    With Preface by Mrs. HUMPHRY WARD. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

=British Campaigns in Flanders.= By the Hon. J. W. FORTESCUE, author
    of “The History of the British Army,” etc. With Maps. Extra
    Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d. net.

      This volume consists of chapters selected from Mr. Fortescue’s
      “History of the British Army.”

=The Case for Compulsory Military Service.= By G. G. COULTON, author
    of “The Main Illusions of Pacificism.” Extra Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
    net.

                   LONDON: MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               Footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

    The author most commonly abbreviates her subject’s name as ‘S.
    J.-B.’, but frequently neglects to punctuate it consistently.
    These lapses have been corrected, with no further notice here.
    Likewise, lapses in punctuation of the Index have been silently
    rectified.

    Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been
    corrected, and are noted here.

    The many nested quotations result in some inconsistencies in
    punctuation, resulting in missing or seemingly superfluous
    quotation marks. Corrections were made if the voice or context
    seems to warrant them, and otherwise are simply noted below. The
    quoted passages typically begin and end with double quotation
    marks, but interior paragraphs do not follow the convention of
    opening each with a quotation.

    On p. 255, a misprint seems to have disrupted the word ‘about’
    as ‘a bo’. The correction makes sense, but is speculative.

    In the Index, in the first column of p. 583, the entry for Mr.
    Robert Somerville is missing a page reference. The sole
    reference to Mr. Somerville occurred on p. 498, and that has
    been added to the text.

    The entry for ‘Miss Wolstenholme’ refers the reader to ‘Mrs.
    Wolstenholme Elmy’; however, the Index contains no such entry.
    Elizabeth Wolstenholme-Elmy was an English suffragist and
    writer, who is referred to twice in the text on pp. 284 and 381.

    The entry for ‘A Visit to Some American Schools and Colleges’
    mistakenly refers the reader to Part I. Chapter XXIII. This has
    been corrected to Chapter XIII.

    The references are to the page and line in the original. Those
    with three numbers refer to the line within the designated note
    on that page. A prefix of ‘i’ indicates that this is an index
    page, and that the second number refers to the column on that
    page.

 21.7       “Now for a word about the ‘bowing,’[”] he says Added.

 21.8       [‘/“]It is of _no_ importance in itself,       Replaced.

 24.26      and may be long i[s/n] showing fruit           Replaced.

 57.10      ‘Yes,  ma’am ma’am[.]’                         Added.

 58.28      did not much admire me, I guess, that          Added.
            night.[”]

 60.17      unless you want to see it.[’]                  Added.

 63.7       ‘Which faith except..., etc.’[”]               Added.

 63.21      [“]M. brought me an invite                     Added.

 74.32      Feb. 11, 1865![”]                              Added.

 97.21      makest me to dwell in safety.[’]”              Added.

 101.39     and have felt most solemnly[,/.]               Replaced.

 107.3      I was so annoyed[./,]—it seemed so silly       Replaced.

 111.40     May 9th. [“]We do well to struggle             Added.

 115.3      for which I am looking so earnestly....[’]     Removed.

 119.20     Yours affectly, S. L. J.-B.[”]                 Added.

 119.32     It’s so weak, it can’t do harm that way.[’]    Added.

 131.33.2   she writes in her diary[!/:]                   Replaced.

 135.16     and here, perhaps, the answer.[’]”             Added.

 138.4      the girls’ progress,[”] ought to comfort me    Removed.
            there,

 145.33     by the doubt and co[m/n]tempt                  Replaced.

 154.35.6   I keep such company.[’/”]                      Replaced.

 157.18     when I am next in the North.[”]                Added.

 164.26     we got on grandly....[”]                       Added.

 167.6      all connection of time and place.[”]           Added.

 167.18     not a bad church, will it be?[”]               Added.

 167.38     so wonderfully, bewitchingly, grandly          _sic_
            [beautifully] as this.

 174.35     [“]Dec. 15th. I have just begun                Added.

 180.17     if not of the conquerors.[”]                   Added.

 180.32     Well done America and L. E. S.!—bless her.[”]  Added.

 181.40     to run close to practical atheism....[”]       Added.

 191.41     C. E. BROWN-S[E/É]QUARD.                       Replaced.

 192.10     [“]Dr. A. ‘not afraid of responsibility        Added.

 203.43     with the old Mother.[”]                        Added.

 205.16     Wasn’t I right?...[”]                          Added.

 205.39     you can read and forward respect[t]ively       Removed.

 234.41     if poss[s]ible before Simpson goes.            Removed.

 243.15     of what things we have need.’[”]               Removed.

 246.37     [“]I am so glad that you are prospering so     Removed.
            well

 255.25     and told him I was studyi[m/n]g Medicine       Replaced.

 255.39     spend some money [a bo/about] it               Speculation.

 256.6      and to University Court July 5th.[”]           Added.

 257.39     let me not prejudge what is best.[’]           Added.

 258.17     [“/‘]Unlucky to say so!’                       Replaced.

 260.30     the resolution of the Un[vei/ive]rsity Court   Transposed.

 260.32     by the Chancellor on November 12th[,/.]        Replaced.

 289.35     PA[RT/TR]ICK HERON WATSON.                     Transposed.

 293.20     he’ll be hitting a policeman![’]               Added.

 321.27     the noble strug[g]le she is making             Added.

 333.41     thrown back in their profess[s]ional studies   Removed.

 335.8      time to call a mee[e]ting.                     Removed.

 341.27     your conscience will prevent your              Added.
            sleeping!’[”]

 374.25     Thanks for your kind letter[.]                 Added.

 376.9      of your prof[f]ession                          Removed.

 379.19     [“]It is just a year since we parted           Added.

 383.30     although I [I ]expect he thought               Removed.

 448.14     [“]So much better than I.”                     Removed.

 449.7      the personal charm, intelligen[e/c]e and       Replaced.
            humour

 464.2      [‘/“]Why do you recommend Vermouth?”           Replaced.

 469.16     to those who suffer _young_[’]                 Added.

 509.29     to admit women forthwith to graduation in      Added.
            medicine[.]

 511.29     [“]Dr. —— and Dr. —— [the consultants] have    Added.
            been here

 514.6      a removal to larger premises[,/.]              Replaced.

 546.15     specially to the “people of God[.”/”?]         Replaced.

 i566.1.51  Brown-S[e/é]quard, Professor, 191.             Replaced.

 i568.2.28  (Mrs. Hil[l]house) was giving him              Removed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Sophia Jex-Blake, by 
Margaret Georgina Todd

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF SOPHIA JEX-BLAKE ***

***** This file should be named 54215-0.txt or 54215-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/2/1/54215/

Produced by KD Weeks, MWS and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile,
Volume II, by James Bruce

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile, Volume II
       In the years 1769, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772 and 1773

Author: James Bruce

Release Date: February 17, 2017 [EBook #54181]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS VOL. 2 OF 2 ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Wayne Hammond and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









  TRAVELS
  TO DISCOVER THE
  SOURCE OF THE NILE,
  In the Years 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772, and 1773.

  IN FIVE VOLUMES.

  BY JAMES BRUCE OF KINNAIRD, ESQ. F.R.S.

  [Illustration]

  VOL. II.

  _Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona_
  _Multi, sed omnes illachrymabiles_
  _Urgentur ignotique longâ_
  _Nocte, carent quia vate sacro._
                     HORAT.

  EDINBURGH:
  PRINTED BY J. RUTHVEN,
  FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON,
  PATERNOSTER-ROW, LONDON.

  M.DCC.XC.




CONTENTS

OF THE

SECOND VOLUME.


  BOOK III.

  ANNALS OF ABYSSINIA.
  Translated from the Original.

  CONTAINING THE HISTORY OF THE ABYSSINIANS, FROM
  THE RESTORATION OF THE LINE OF SOLOMON TO THE
  DEATH OF SOCINIOS, AND THE DOWNFALL OF THE ROMISH
  RELIGION.


  ICON AMLAC.
  From 1268 to 1283.

  _Line of Solomon restored under this Prince--He continues the Royal
  Residence in Shoa--Tecla Haimanout dies--Reasons for the Fabrication
  of the supposed Nicene Canon_,                                   P. 1.


  IGBA SION.
  From 1283 to 1312.

  _Quick Succession of Princes--Memoirs of these Reigns
  deficient_,                                                          4


  AMDA SION.
  From 1312 to 1342.

  _Licentious beginning of this King’s Reign--His rigorous Conduct
  with the Monks of Debra Libanos--His Mahometan Subjects Rebel--Mara
  and Adel declare War--Are defeated in several
  Battles, and submit_,                                                5


  SAIF ARAAD.
  From 1342 to 1370.

  _This Prince enjoys a peaceable Reign--Protects the Patriarch of
  Cophts at Cairo from the Persecution of the Soldan_,                60


  WEDEM ASFERI.
  From 1370 to 1380.

  _Memoirs of this and the following Reign defective._                62


  DAVID II.
  From 1380 to 1409.                                                  63

  THEODORUS.
  From 1409 to 1412.

  _Memoirs of this Reign, though held in great Esteem in Abyssinia,
  defective, probably mutilated by the Ecclesiastics_,                64


  ISAAC.
  From 1412 to 1429.

  _No Annals of this, nor the four following Reigns._                 65

  ANDREAS I. OR AMDA SION.                                            66

  TECLA MARIAM, OR HASEB NANYA.
  From 1429 to 1433.                                                  67


  SARWE YASOUS.                                                      ib.


  AMDA YASOUS.                                                       ib.


  ZARA JACOB.
  From 1434 to 1468.

  _Sends Ambassadors from Jerusalem to the Council of
  Florence--First Entry of the Roman Catholics into Abyssinia,
  Religion--King persecutes the Remnants of Sabaism and
  Idolatry--Mahometan Provinces rebel, and are subdued--The
  King dies_,                                                         68


  BŒDA MARIAM.
  From 1468 to 1478.

  _Revives the Banishment of Princes to the Mountain--War with
  Adel--Death of the King--Attempts by Portugal to discover
  Abyssinia and the Indies_,                                          78


  ISCANDER, OR, ALEXANDER.
  From 1478 to 1495.

  _Iscander declares War with Adel--Good Conduct of the
  King--Betrayed and Murdered by Za Saluce_,                         114


  NAOD.
  From 1495 to 1508.

  _Wise Conduct of the King--Prepares for a War with the
  Moors--Concludes an Honourable Peace with Adel_,                   120


  DAVID III.
  From 1508 to 1540.

  _David, an Infant, succeeds--Queen sends Matthew Ambassador to
  Portugal--David takes the field--Defeat of the Moors--Arrival
  of an Embassy from Portugal--Disastrous War with Adel_,            124

  CLAUDIUS, OR ATZENAF SEGUED.
  From 1540 to 1559.

  _Prosperous Beginning of Claudius’s Reign--Christopher de Gama
  lands in Abyssinia--Prevented by the Rainy Season from joining
  the King--Battle of Ainal--Battle of Offalo--Christopher de Gama
  Slain--Battle of Isaacs Bet--Moors defeated, and their General
  Slain--Abyssinian Army defeated--Claudius Slain--Remarkable
  Behaviour of Nur, Governor of Zeyla General of the
  Moors_,                                                            173


  MENAS, OR ADAMAS SEGUED.
  From 1559 to 1563.

  _Baharnagash rebels, proclaims Tascar King--Defeated by the
  King--Cedes Dobarwa to the Turks, and makes a League with the
  of Masuab_,                                                        206


  SERTZA DENGHEL, OR MELEC SEGUED.
  From 1563 to 1595.

  _King crowned at Axum--Abyssinia invaded by the Galla--Account
  of that People--The King defeats the Army of Adel--Beats the
  Falasha, and kills their King--Battle of the Mareb--Basha slain,
  and Turks expelled from Dobarwa--King is poisoned--Names Za
  Denghel his Successor_,                                            214


  ZA DENGHEL.
  From 1595 to 1604.

  _Za Denghel dethroned--Jacob a Minor succeeds--Za Denghel is
  Restored--Banishes Jacob to Narea--Converted to the Romish
  Religion--Battle of Bartcho, and Death of the King_,               238


  JACOB.
  From 1604 to 1605.

  _Makes Proposals to Socinios, which are rejected--Takes the
  Field--Bad Conduct and Defeat of Za Selasse--Battle of Debra
  Zeit--Jacob defeated and Slain_,                                   252


  SOCINIOS OR MELEC SEGUED.
  From 1605 to 1632.

  _Socinios embraces the Romish Religion--War with Sennaar--With
  the Shepherds--Violent Conduct of the Romish Patriarch--Lasta
  rebels--Defeated at Wainadega--Socinios restores the Alexandrian
  Religion--Resigns his Crown to his Eldest Son_,                    262


  BOOK IV.

  CONTINUATION OF THE ANNALS, FROM THE DEATH OF SOCINIOS,
  TILL MY ARRIVAL IN ABYSSINIA.


  FACILIDAS OR SULTAN SEGUED,
  From 1632 to 1665.

  _The Patriarch and Missionaries are Banished--Seek the
  Protection of a Rebel--Delivered up to the King, and sent
  _Claudius rebels--Sent to Wechné--Death and Character of
  the King_,                                                         401


  HANNES I. OR ŒLAFESEGUED.
  From 1665 to 1680.

  _Bigotry of the King--Disgusts his Son Yasous, who flies
  from Gondar_,                                                      423


  YASOUS I.
  From 1680 to 1704.

  _Brilliant Expedition of the King to Wechné--Various Campaigns
  against the Agows and Galla--Comet appears--Expedition against
  Zeegam and the Eastern Shangalla--Poncet’s Journey--Murat’s
  Embassy--Du Roule’s Embassy--Du Roule murdered at Sennaar--The
  King is assassinated_,                                             425


  TECLA HAIMANOUT I.
  From 1704 to 1706.

  _Writes in Favour of Du Roule--Defeats the Rebels--Is
  Assassinated while Hunting_,                                       517


  TIFILIS.
  From 1706 to 1709.

  _Dissembles with his Brother’s Assassins--Execution of the
  Regicides--Rebellion and Death of Tigi_,                           533


  OUSTAS.
  From 1709 to 1714.

  _Usurps the Crown--Addicted to Hunting--Account of the
  Shangalla--Active and Bloody Reign--Entertains Catholic sick
  and dies, but how, uncertain_,                                     538


  DAVID IV.
  From 1714 to 1719.

  _Convocation of the Clergy--Catholic Priests executed--A Second
  Convocation--Clergy insult the King--His severe Punishment--King
  dies of Poison_,                                                   577


  BACUFFA.
  From 1719 to 1729.

  _Bloody Reign--Exterminates the Conspirators--Counterfeits
  Death--Becomes very Popular_,                                      595


  YASOUS II. OR, ADIAM SEGUED.
  From 1729 to 1753.

  _Rebellion in the Beginning of this Reign--King addicted to
  hunting--To building, and the Arts of Peace--Attacks Sennaar--Loses
  his Army--Takes Samayat--Receives Baady King of Sennaar under
  his Protection_,                                                   608


  JOAS.
  From 1753 to 1769.

  _This Prince a favorer of the Galla his Relations--Great
  dissentions on bringing them to Court--War of Begemder--Ras
  Michael brought to Gondar--Defeats Ayo--Mariam Barea refuses to
  be accessary to his Death--King favours Waragna Fasil--Battle of
  Azazo--King Assassinated in his Palace_,                           660


  HANNES II.
  1769.

  _Hannes, Brother to Bacuffa, chosen King--Is brought from
  Wechné--Crowned at Gondar--His horrid Behaviour--Refuses to
  march against Fasil--Is poisoned by Order of Ras Michael_,         707


  TECLA HAIMANOUT II.
  1769.

  _Succeeds his Father Hannes--His Character and prudent
  Behaviour--Cultivates Michael’s Friendship--Marches willingly
  against Fasil--Defeats him at Fagitta--Description of that
  Battle_,                                                           709


  TRAVELS

  TO DISCOVER

  THE SOURCE OF THE NILE.




  BOOK III.

  ANNALS OF ABYSSINIA,

  TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL:

  CONTAINING THE HISTORY OF THE ABYSSINIANS, FROM THE
  RESTORATION OF THE LINE OF SOLOMON TO THE DEATH OF
  SOCINIOS, AND THE DOWNFALL OF THE ROMISH RELIGION.

[Illustration]


ICON AMLAC.

From 1268 to 1283.

    _Line of Solomon restored under this Prince--He continues the
    Royal Residence in Shoa--Tecla Haimanout dies--Reasons for the
    Fabrication of the supposed Nicene Canon_.


Although the multiplicity of names assumed by the kings of Abyssinia,
and the confusion occasioned by this custom, has more than once been
complained of in the foregoing sheets, we have here a prince that is
an exception to this practice, otherwise almost general. Icon Amlac
is the only name by which we know this first prince of the race of
Solomon, restored now fully to his dominions, after a long exile his
family had suffered by the treason of Judith. The signification of his
name is, “Let him be made our sovereign,” and is apparently that which
he took upon his inauguration or accession to the throne; and his name
of baptism, and bye-name or popular name given him, are both therefore
lost.

Although now restored to the complete possession of his ancient
dominions, he was too wise all at once to leave his dutiful kingdom of
Shoa and return to Tigré. He continued to make Tegulat, the capital of
Shoa, his seat of the empire, and there reigned fifteen years.

In the 14th year of the reign of this prince, his great benefactor,
Abuna Tecla Haimanout, founder of the Order of Monks of Debra Libanos,
and restorer of the Royal family, died at that monastery in great
reputation and very advanced age. He was the last Abyssinian ordained
Abuna; and this sufficiently shews the date of that canon I have
already spoken of, falsely said to be a canon of the council of Nicea.

Though Le Grande and some others have pretended to be in doubt at what
time, and for what reason, this canon could have been made, I think
the reason very plain, which fixes it to the time of Tecla Haimanout,
as well as shews it to be a forgery of the church of Alexandria,
no doubt with the council and advice of this great statesman Tecla
Haimanout. Egypt was fallen under the dominion of the Saracens; the
Coptic patriarch, and all the Christians of the church of Alexandria,
were their slaves or servants; but the Abyssinians were free and
independent, both in church and state, and a mortal hatred had followed
the conquest from variety of causes, of which the persecution of the
Christians in Egypt was not one of the least. As it was probable that
these reasons would increase daily, the consequence which promised
inevitably to follow was, that the Abyssinians would not apply to
Alexandria, or Cairo, for a metropolitan sent by the Mahometans, but
would choose a head of their own, and so become independent altogether
of the chair of St Mark. As they were cut off from the rest of the
world by seas and deserts almost inaccessible, as they wanted books,
and were every day relaxing in discipline, total ignorance was likely
to follow their separation from their primitive church, and this could
not end but in a relapse into Paganism, or in their embracing the
religion of Mahomet.

This prohibition of making any of their countrymen Abuna, secured them
always a foreigner, and a man of foreign education and attachments, to
fill the place of Abuna, and by this means assured the dependence of
the Abyssinians upon the patriarch of Alexandria. This is what I judge
probable, for I have already invincibly shewn, that it is impossible
this canon could be one of the first general Council; and its being in
Arabic, and conceived in very barbarous terms, sufficiently evinces
that it was forged at this period.

[Illustration]




IGBA SION.

From 1283 to 1312.

_Quick Succession of Princes--Memoirs of these Reigns deficient._


To Icon Amlac succeeded Igba Sion, and after him five other princes,
his brothers, Bahar Segued, Tzenaf Segued, Jan Segued, Haseb Araad,
and Kedem Segued, all in five years. So quick a succession in so few
years seems to mark very unsettled times. Whether it was a civil war
among themselves that brought these reigns to so speedy a conclusion,
or whether it was that the Moorish states in Adel had grown in power,
and sought successfully against them, we do not know. One thing only
we are certain of, that no molestation was offered by the late royal
family of Lasta, who continued in peace, and firm in the observation
of their treaty. I therefore am inclined to think, that a civil war
among the brothers was the occasion of the quick succession of so many
princes; and that in the time when the kingdom was weakened by this
calamity, the states of Adel, grown rich and powerful, had improved
the occasion, and seized upon all that territory from Azab to Melinda,
and cut off the Abyssinians entirely from the sea-coast, and from an
opportunity of trading directly with India from the ports situated upon
the ocean. And my reason is, that, in a reign which speedily follows,
we find the kingdom of Adel increased greatly in power, and Moorish
princes from Arabia established in little principalities, exactly
corresponding with the southern limits of Abyssinia, and placed between
them and the ocean; and we see, at the same time, a rancour and hatred
firmly rooted in the breasts of both nations, one of the causes of
which is constantly alledged by the Abyssinian princes to be, that the
Moors of Adel were anciently their subjects and vassals, had withdrawn
themselves from their allegiance, and owed their present independence
to rebellion only.

To these princes succeeded Wedem Araad, their youngest brother, who
reigned fifteen years, probably in peace, for in this state we find the
kingdom in the days of his successor; but then it is such a peace that
we see it only wanted any sort of provocation from one party to the
other, for both to break out into very cruel, long, and bloody wars.

[Illustration]




AMDA SION.

From 1312 to 1342.

    _Licentious beginning of this King’s Reign--His rigorous
    Conduct with the Monks of Debra Libanos--His Mahometan Subjects
    rebel--Mara and Adel declare War--Are defeated in several
    Battles, and submit._


Amda Sion succeeded his father, Wedem Araad, who was youngest brother
of Icon Amlac, and came to the crown upon the death of his uncles.
He is generally known by this his inauguration name; his Christian
name was Guebra Mascal. His reign began with a scene as disgraceful
to the name of Christian as it was new in the annals of Ethiopia,
and which promised a character very different from what this prince
preserved ever afterwards. He had for a time, it seems, privately loved
a concubine of his father, but had now taken her to live with him
publicly; and, not content with committing this sort of incest, he, in
a very little time after, had seduced his two sisters.

Tegulat[1] (the capital of Shoa) was then the royal residence; and
near it the monastery of Debra Libanos, founded by Tecla Haimanout
restorer of the line of Solomon. To this monastery many men, eminent
for learning and religion, had retired from the scenes of war that
desolated Palestine and Egypt. Among the number of these was one
Honorius, a Monk of the first character for piety, who, since, has been
canonized as a saint. Honorius thought it his duty first to admonish,
and then publicly excommunicate the king for these crimes.

It should seem that patience was as little among this prince’s virtues
as chastity, as he immediately ordered Honorius to be apprehended,
stripped naked, and severely whipped through every street of his
capital. That same night the town took fire, and was entirely consumed,
and the clergy lost no time to persuade the people, that it was the
blood of Honorius that turned to fire whenever it had dropt upon the
ground, and so had burnt the city. The king, perhaps better informed,
thought otherwise of this, and supposed the burning of his capital was
owing to the Monks themselves. He therefore banished those of Debra
Libanos out of the province of Shoa. The mountain of Geshen had been
chosen for the prison wherein to guard the princes of the male-line of
the race of Solomon, after the massacre by Esther[2], upon the rock
Damo in Tigré.

Geshen is a very steep and high rock, in the kingdom of Amhara,
adjoining to, and under the jurisdiction of Shoa. Hither the king
sent Philip the Itchegué, chief of the monastery of Debra Libanos,
and he scattered the rest through Dembea, Tigré, and Begemder, (whose
inhabitants were mostly Pagans and Jews), where they greatly propagated
the knowledge of the Christian religion.

This instance of severity in the king had the effect to make all ranks
of people return to their duty; and all talk of Honorius and his
miracles was dropt. The town was rebuilt speedily, more magnificently
than ever, and Amda Sion found time to turn his thoughts to correct
those abuses, to efface the unfavourable impression which they had made
upon the minds of his people at home, and which, besides, had gained
considerable ground abroad.

It has been before mentioned, and will be further inculcated in the
course of this history as a fact, without the remembrance of which
the military expeditions of Abyssinia cannot be well understood, that
two opposite seasons prevail in countries separated by a line almost
imperceptible; that during our European winter months, that is, from
October to March, the winter or rainy season prevails on the coast of
the ocean and Red Sea, but that these rains do not fall in our summer,
(the rainy season in Abyssinia), which was the reason why Amda Sion
said to his mutinous troops, he would lead them to Adel or Aussa, where
it did not rain, as we shall presently observe.

The different nations that dwell along the coast, both of the Red Sea
and of the ocean, live in fixed huts or houses. We shall begin at the
northmost, or nearest Atbara. The first is Ageeg, so named from a small
island on the coast, opposite to the mountains of the Habab, Agag, or
Agaazi, the principal district of the noble or governing Shepherds,
as is before fully explained, different in colour and hair from the
Shepherds of the Thebaid living to the northward. Then follow the
different tribes of these, Tora, Shiho, Taltal, Azimo, and Azabo, where
the Red Sea turns eastward, towards the Straits, all woolly-headed,
the primitive carriers of Saba, and the perfume and gold country. Then
various nations inhabit along the ocean, all native blacks, remnants of
the Cushite Troglodyte, but who do not change their habitations with
the seasons, but live within land in caves, and some of them now in
houses.

In Adel and Aussa the inhabitants are tawny, and not black, and have
long hair; they are called Gibbertis, which some French writers of
voyages into this country say, mean Slaves, from Guebra, the Abyssinian
word for slave or servant. But as it would be very particular that a
nation like these, so rich and so powerful, who have made themselves
independent of their ancient masters the Abyssinians, have wrested so
many provinces from them, and, from the difference of their faith, hold
them in such utter contempt, should nevertheless be content to call
themselves their slaves, so nothing is more true, than that this name
of Gibberti has a very different import. Jabber, in Arabic, the word
from which it is derived, signifies the _faith_, or the _true faith_;
and Gibberti consequently means the _faithful_, or the _orthodox_,
by which name of _honour_ these moors, inhabiting the low country of
Abyssinia, call each other, as being constant in their faith amidst
Christians with whom they are at perpetual war.

There is no current coin in Abyssinia. Gold is paid by weight; all
the revenues are chiefly paid in kind, viz. oxen, sheep, and honey,
which are the greatest necessaries of life. As for luxuries, they are
obtained by a barter of gold, myrrh, coffee, elephants teeth, and a
variety of other articles which are carried over to Arabia; and in
exchange for these is brought back whatever is commissioned.

Every great man in Abyssinia has one of these Gibbertis for his
factor. The king has many, who are commonly the shrewdest and most
intelligent of their profession. These were the first inhabitants of
Abyssinia, whom commerce connected with the Arabians on the other side
of the Straits of Babelmandeb, with whom they intermarry, or with one
another, which preserves their colour and features, resembling both
the Abyssinians and Arabians. In Arabia, they are under the protection
of some of their own countrymen, who being sold when young as slaves,
are brought up in the Mahometan religion, and enjoy all the principal
posts under the Sherriffe of Mecca and the Arabian princes. These are
the people who at particular times have appeared in Europe, and who
have been straightway taken for, and treated as Ambassadors.

More southward and westward are the kingdoms of Mara, Worgla, and
Pagoma, small principalities of fixed habitations by the sea, at times
free, at others dependent upon Adel; and, to the south of these, in the
same flat country, is Hadea, whose capital is Harar, and governed by a
prince, who is a Gibberti likewise; and who, by marrying a Sherriffa,
or female descendant of Mahomet, is now reckoned a Sherriffe or noble
of Mahomet’s family, distinguished by his wearing habits, for the most
part green, and above all a grass-green turban, a mark of hatred to
Christianity.

The Gibbertis, then, are the princes and merchants of this country,
converted to the Mahometan faith soon after the death of Mahomet, when
the Baharnagash (as we have already stated) revolted from the empire
of the Abyssinians, in whose hands all the riches of the country are
centered. The black inhabitants are only their subjects, hewers of wood
and drawers of water, who serve them in their families at home, take
care of their camels when employed in caravans abroad, and who make the
principal part of their forces in the field.

But there are other inhabitants still besides these Gibbertis and
native blacks, whom we must not confound with the indigenous of this
country, how much soever they may resemble them. The first of these are
by the Portuguese historians called _Moors_, who are merchants from
the west of Africa. Many of these, expelled from Spain by Ferdinand
and Isabella, fixed their residence here, and were afterwards joined
by others of their Moorish brethren, either exiles from Spain, or
inhabitants of Morocco, whom the desire of commerce induced first to
settle in Arabia, till the great oppressions that followed the conquest
of Egypt and Arabia, under Selim and Soliman, interrupted their
trade, and scattered them here along the coast. These are the Moors
that Vasques de Gama[3] met at Mombaza, Magadoxa, and Melinda; at all
places, but the last of which, they endeavoured to betray him. These
also were the Moors that he found in India, having no profession but
trade, in every species of which they excelled.

The fourth sort are Arabian merchants, who come over occasionally to
recover their debts, and renew correspondences with the merchants of
this country. These are the richest of all, and are the bankers of the
Gibbertis, who furnish them funds and merchandise, with which they
carry on a most lucrative and extensive trade into the heart of Africa,
through all the mountains of Abyssinia to the western sea, and through
countries which are inaccessible to camels, where the ass, the mule,
and, in some places, oxen, are the only beasts used in carriage.

There is a fifth sort, almost below notice, unless it is for the
mischief they have constantly done their country; they are the
Abyssinian apostates from Christianity, the most inveterate enemies it
has, and who are employed chiefly as soldiers. While in that country
they are not much esteemed, though, when transported to India, they
have constantly turned out men of confidence and trust, and the best
troops those eastern nations have.

There is a sixth, still less in number than even these, and not
known on this Continent till a few years before. These were the
Turks who came from Greece and Syria, and who were under Selim, and
Soliman his son, the instruments of the conquest of Egypt and Arabia;
small garrisons of whom were everywhere left by the Turks in all
the fortresses and considerable towns they conquered. They are an
hereditary kind of militia, who, marrying each other’s daughters,
or with the women of the country, continue from father to son to
receive from Constantinople the same pay their forefathers had from
Selim. These, though degenerate in figure and manners into an exact
resemblance to the natives of the countries in which they since lived,
do still continue to maintain their superiority by a constant skill
and attention to fire-arms, which were, at the time of their first
appearance here, little known or in use among either Abyssinians or
Arabians, and the means of first establishing this preference.

It has been already observed, that the Mahometan Moors and Arabs
possessed all the low country on the Indian Ocean, and opposite to
Arabia Felix; and being, by their religion, obliged to go in pilgrimage
to Mecca, as also by their sole profession, which was trade, they
became, by consequence, the only carriers and directors of the commerce
of Abyssinia. All the country to the east and north of Shoa was
possessed and commanded chiefly by Mahometan merchants appointed by
the king; and they had established a variety of marts or fairs from
Ifat, all the way as far as Adel.

Adel and Mara were two of the most powerful kingdoms which lie on the
Indian Ocean; and, being constantly supported by soldiers from Arabia,
were the first to withdraw themselves from obedience to the king of
Abyssinia, and seldom paid their tribute unless when the prince came
to raise it there with an army. Ifat, Fatigar, and Dawaro, were indeed
originally Christian provinces; but, in weak reigns, having been ceded
to Moorish governors, for sums of money, they, by degrees, renounced
both their religion and allegiance.

From what has been observed, the reader will conceive, that where it
is said the king, from his capital in Shoa, marched down into Dawaro,
Hadea, or Adel, that he then descended from the highest mountains down
to the flat country on the level with the sea. That this country, from
Hadea to Dawaro, having been the seat of war for ages, was, partly
by the soldier for the use of the camp, partly by the husbandman
for the necessaries of life, cleared of wood, where the water stood
constantly in pools throughout the year; and, being all composed of
fat black earth, which the torrents bring down from the rainy country
of Abyssinia, was sown with millet and different kinds of grain in the
driest ground, while, nearer the mountains, they pastured numerous
herds of cattle. Notwithstanding, however, the country was possessed
of these advantages, the climate was intensely hot, feverish, and
unhealthy, and, for the most part, from these circumstances, fatal to
strangers, and hated by the Abyssinians.

Again, when it is said that the king had marched to Samhar, it is meant
that he had passed this fruitful country, and is come to that part of
the zone, or belt, (nearest the sea) composed of gravel; which, though
it enjoys neither the water nor the fruitfulness of the black earth,
is in a great measure free from its attendant diseases, and here the
cities and towns are placed, while the crop, oxen, and cattle, are in
the cultivated part near the mountains, which in the language of the
country is called _Mazaga_, signifying _black mould_.

Lastly, when he hears the army murmuring at being kept during the
rainy season in the Kolla below, he is to remember, that all was
cool, pleasant, and safe in Upper Abyssinia. The soldiers, therefore,
languished for the enjoyment of their own families, without any other
occupation but merriment, festivity, and every species of gratification
that wine, and the free and uncontrouled society of the female-sex,
could produce.

Having now sufficiently explained and described the various names and
inhabitants, the situation, soil, and climate of those provinces about
to be the theatre of the war, I shall proceed to declare the occasion
of it, which was nothing more than the fruit of those prejudices which,
I have already said, the loose behaviour of the king in the beginning
of his reign had produced among his neighbours, and the calamities
which had enfeebled the kingdom in the preceding reigns.

It happened that one of those Moorish factors, whom I have already
described, having in charge the commercial interests of the king,
had been assassinated and robbed in the province of Ifat, when the
King was busied with Honorius and his Monks. Without complaining or
expostulating, he suddenly assembled his troops, having ordered them to
rendezvous at Shugura upon the frontiers, and, to shew his impatience
for revenge, with seven[4] horsemen he fell upon the nearest Mahometan
settlements, who were perfectly secure, and put all he found in his way
to the sword without exception. Then placing himself at the head of his
army, he marched, by a long day’s journey, straight to Ifat, burning
Hungura, Jadai, Kubat, Fadise, Calise, and Argai, towns that lye in
the way, full of all sorts of valuable merchandise, and, finding no
where a force assembled to oppose him, he divided his army into small
detachments, sending them different ways, with orders to lay the whole
countries, where they came, waste with fire and sword, while he himself
remained in the camp to guard the spoil, the women, and the baggage.

The Moors, astonished at this torrent of desolation, which so suddenly
had broken out under a prince whom they had considered as immersed
in pleasure, flew all to arms; and being informed that the king was
alone, and scarcely had soldiers to guard his camp, they assembled
in numbers under the command of Hak-eddin, governor of Ifat, who had
before plundered and murdered the king’s servant. They then determined
to attack Amda Sion early in the morning, but luckily two of his
detachments had returned to the camp to his assistance, and joined him
the very night before.

It was scarcely day when the Moors presented themselves; but, far from
surprising the Abyssinians buried in sleep, they found the king with
his army ranged in battle, who, without giving them time to recover
from their surprise, attacked them in person with great fury; and
singling out Derdar, brother to Hak-eddin, animating his men before
the ranks, he struck him so violently with his lance that he fell
dead among his horse’s feet, in the sight of both armies; whilst the
Abyssinian troops pressing every where briskly forward, the Moors took
to flight, and were pursued with great slaughter into the woods and
fastnesses.

After this victory, the king ordered his troops to build huts for
themselves, at least such as could not find houses ready built. He
ordered, likewise, a great tract of land contiguous to be plowed and
sown, meaning to intimate, that his intention was to stay there with
his army all the rainy season.

The Mahometans, from this measure, if it should be carried into
execution, saw nothing but total extirpation before their eyes;
they, therefore, with one consent, submitted to the tribute imposed
upon them; and the king having removed Hak-eddin, placed his brother
Saber-eddin in his stead, and the rainy season being now begun,
dismissed his army, and returned to Tegulat in Shoa.

Though the personal gallantry of the king was a quality sufficient of
itself to make him a favourite of the soldiers, his liberality was not
less; all the plunder got by his troops in the field was faithfully
divided among those who had fought for him; nor did he ever pretend to
a share himself, unless on occasions when he was engaged in person,
and then he shared upon an equal footing with the principal officers.

When returned to the capital, he shewed the same disinterestedness and
generosity which he had done in the field, and he distributed all he
had won for his share among the great men, whom the necessary duties
of government had obliged to remain at home, as also amongst the poor,
and priests for the maintenance of churches; and, as well by this, as
by his zeal and activity against the enemies of Christianity, he became
the greatest favourite of all ranks of the clergy, notwithstanding the
unpromising appearances at the beginning of his reign.

The rainy season in Abyssinia generally puts an end to the active part
of war, as every one retires then to towns and villages to screen
themselves from the inclemency of the climate, deluged now with daily
rain. The soldier, the husbandman, and, above all, the women, dedicate
this season to continued festivity and riot. These villages and
towns are always placed upon the highest mountains. The valleys that
intervene are soon divided by large and rapid torrents. Every hollow
foot-path becomes a stream, and the valleys between the hills become
so miry as not to bear horse; and the waters, both deep and violent,
are too apt to shift their direction to suffer any one on foot to
pass safely. All this season, and this alone, people sleep in their
houses in safety; their lances and shields are hung up on the sides of
their hall, and their saddles and bridles taken off their horses; for
in Abyssinia, at other times, the horses are always bridled, and are
accustomed to eat and drink with this incumbrance. It is not, indeed,
the same sort of bridle they use in the field, but a small bit of iron
like our hunting-bridles, on purpose merely to preserve them in this
habit. The court, and the principal officers of government, retire to
the capital, and there administer justice, make alliances, and prepare
the necessary funds and armaments, which the present exigencies of the
state require on the return of fair weather.

Amda Sion was no sooner returned to Tegulat, than the Moors again
entered into a conspiracy against him. The principal were Amano king
of Hadea, Saber-eddin, whom the king had made governor of Fatigar,
and privately, without any open declaration, Gimmel-eddin governor in
Dawaro. But this conspiracy could not be hid from a prince of Amda
Sion’s vigilance and penetration. He concealed, however, any knowledge
of the matter, lest it should urge the Moors to commence hostilities
too early. He continued, therefore, with diligence, and without
ostentation of any particular design, to make the ordinary preparations
to take the field on the approaching season. This, however, did not
impose upon the enemy. Whether from intelligence, or impatience of
being longer inactive, Saber-eddin began the first hostilities, by
surprising some Christian villages, and plundering and setting fire to
the churches before the rains had yet entirely ceased.

Those that have written accounts of Abyssinia seem to agree in
extolling the people of that country for giving no belief to the
existence or reality of witchcraft or sorcery. Why they have fixed on
this particular nation is hard to determine. But, as for me, I have no
doubt in asserting, that there is not a barbarous or ignorant people
that I ever knew of which this can be truly said; but certainly it
never was less true than when said of Abyssinians. There is scarce a
monk in any lonely monastery, (such as those in the hot and unwholesome
valley of Waldubba), not a hermit of the many upon the mountains, not
an old priest who has lived any time sequestered from society, that
does not pretend to possess charms offensive and defensive, and several
methods by which he can, at will, look into futurity. The Moors are
all, to a man, persuaded of this: their arms and necks are loaded with
amulets against witchcraft. Their women are believed to have all the
mischievous powers of fascination; and both sexes a hundred secrets of
divination. The Falasha are addicted to this in still a greater degree,
if possible. It is always believed by every individual Abyssinian,
that the number of hyænas the smell of carrion brings into the city of
Gondar every night, are the Falasha from the neighbouring mountains,
transformed by the effect and for the purposes of inchantment. Even the
Galla, a barbarous and stranger nation, hostile to the Abyssinians, and
differing in language and religion, still agree with them in a hearty
belief of the possibility of practising witchcraft, so as to occasion
sickness and death at a very great distance, to blast the harvests,
poison the waters, and render people incapable of propagating their
species.

Amano, king of Hadea, had one of these conjurers, who, by his knowledge
of futurity, was famous among all the Mahometans of the low country.
The king of Hadea himself had gone no further than to determine to
rebel; but whether he was to go up to fight with Amda Sion in Shoa, or
whether greater success would attend his expecting him in Hadea, this
was thought a doubt wholly within the province of the conjurer, who
assured Amano, his master, that if he did remain below, and wait for
Amda Sion, in Hadea, that prince would come down to him, and in one
battle lose his kingdom and his life.

The king, whose principal view was to prevent the conjunction of the
confederates, and, if possible, to fight them separately, did not stay
till his whole army was assembled, but, as soon as he got together a
body of troops sufficient to make head against any one of the rebels,
he sent that body immediately on the service it was destined for, in
order to disappoint the general combination.

A large number of horse and foot (whose post was in the van of the
royal army when the king marched at the head of it) was the first
ready, and, without delay, was sent against Amano into Hadea, under
the command of the general of the cavalry. This officer executed the
service on which he was sent with the greatest diligence possible,
having the best horses, and strongest and most active men in the army;
by long marches, he came upon the king of Hadea, surprised him before
his troops were all assembled, gave him an entire defeat, and made him
prisoner. However ill the conjurer had provided for the king’s safety,
he seems to have been more attentive to his own; great search was made
for him by order of Amda Sion, but he was not to be found, having very
early, upon the first sight of the king’s troops, fled and hid himself
in Ifat.

The next detachment was sent against Saber-eddin in Fatigar. The
governor of Amhara commanded this, with orders to lay the whole
country waste, and by all means provoke Saber-eddin to risk a battle,
either before or after the junction of the troops which were to march
thither from Hadea. But when the king was thus busy with the Moors,
news were brought him that the Falasha had rebelled, and were in arms,
in very great numbers. The king ordered Tzaga Christos, governor of
Begemder, to assemble his troops with those of Gondar, Sacalta, and
Damot, and march against these rebels before they had time to ruin the
country; and having thus made provision against all his enemies, Amda
Sion proceeded with the remainder of his army to Dawaro.

Hydar was governor in this province for the king, who, though he shewed
outwardly every appearance of duty and fidelity, was, notwithstanding,
deep in the conspiracy with Saber-eddin, and had close correspondence
with the king of Adel, whose capital, Aussa, was not at a great
distance from him.

The king kept his Easter at Gaza, immediately upon the verge of the
desert; and, being willing to accustom his troops to action and
hardship, he left his tents and baggage behind with the army; and,
secretly taking with him but twenty-six horsemen, he made an incursion
upon Samhar, destroying all before him, and staying all night, tho’ he
had no provisions, in the middle of his enemies, without so much as
lying down to sleep, slacking his belt, or taking off any part of his
armour.

The king was no sooner gone than the army missed him, and was all in
the greatest uproar. But, having finished his expedition, he joined
them in the morning, and encamped again with them. On his arrival, he
found waiting for him a messenger from Tzaga Christos, with accounts
that he had fought successfully with the Falasha, entirely defeated
them, slain many, and forced the rest to hide themselves in their
inaccessible mountains. Immediately after this intelligence, Tzaga
Christos, with his victorious army, joined the king also.

These good tidings were followed by others equally prosperous from
Hadea and Fatigar. They were, that the king’s army in those parts had
forced Saber-eddin to a battle, and beaten him, taken and plundered his
house, and brought his wife and children prisoners; and that the troops
had found that country full of merchandise and riches of all kinds;
that they were already laden and incumbered with the quantity to such a
degree, that they were all speaking of disbanding and retiring to their
houses with riches sufficient for the rest of their lives, although a
great part of the country remained as yet untouched, and, therefore,
it was requested of the king in all diligence to enter it on his side
also, and march southward till both armies met. Immediately upon this
message, the king, having refreshed his troops, and informed them of
the good prospects that were before them, decamped with his whole army,
and entered the province of Ifat.

When Saber-eddin saw the king’s forces were joined, that he had
no allies, and that it was, in the situation of his army, equally
dangerous to stay or to fly, he took a resolution of submitting himself
to the king’s mercy; but, first, he endeavoured to soften his anger,
and obtain some assurances through the mediation of the queen. The
king, however, having publicly reproved the queen for offering to
intermeddle in such matters, and growing more violent and inflexible
upon this application, there remained no alternative but that of
surrendering himself at discretion. Whereupon Saber-eddin threw himself
at the king’s feet. The soldiers and by-standers, far from being moved
at such a sight, with one voice earnestly besought the king, that the
murderer of so many priests, and the profaner and destroyer of so many
Christian churches, should instantly meet the death his crimes had
merited. The king, however, whose mercy seems to have been equal to his
bravery, after having reproved him with great asperity, and upbraided
him with his cruelty, presumption, and ingratitude, ordered him only to
be put in irons, and committed to a close prison. At the same time, he
displaced Hydar, governor of the province of Dawaro, of whose treason
he had been long informed; and he invested Gimmel-eddin, Saber-eddin’s
brother, with the government of the Mahometan provinces, who, as he
pretended, had not been present at the beginning of the war, but had
preserved his allegiance to the king, and dissuaded his brother from
the rebellion.

While the king was thus settling the government of the rebellious
provinces, he received intelligence that the kings of Adel and Mara had
resolved to march after him into Shoa when he returned, and give him
battle.

At this time the king was encamped on the river Hawash, at the head
of the whole army, now united. This news of the hostile intentions of
the kings of Adel and Mara, so exasperated him, that he determined
to enlarge his scheme of vengeance beyond the limits he had first
prescribed to it. With this view, he called the principal officers
of his army together, while he himself stood upon an eminence, the
soldiers surrounding him on all sides. Near him, on the same eminence,
was a monk, noted for his holiness, in the habit in which he celebrated
divine service. The king, in a long speech pronounced with unusual
vehemence, described the many offences committed against him by the
Mahometan states on the coast. The ringleaders of these commotions,
he declared, were the kings of Adel and Mara. He enumerated various
instances of cruelty, of murder, and sacrilege, of which they had been
guilty; the number of priests that they had slain, the churches that
they had burned, and the Christian women and children that they had
carried into slavery, which was now become a commerce, and a great
motive of war. They, and they only, had stirred up his Mahometan
subjects to infest the frontiers both in peace and war. He said, that,
considering the immense booty which had been taken, it might seem that
avarice was the motive of his being now in arms, but this, for his
own part, he totally disclaimed. He neither had nor would apply the
smallest portion of the plunder to his own use, but considered it as
unlawful, as being purchased with the blood and liberty of his subjects
and brethren, the meanest of whom he valued more than the blood and
riches of all the infidels in Adel. He, therefore, called them together
to be witnesses that he dedicated himself a soldier to Jesus Christ;
and he did now swear upon the holy eucharist, that, though but twenty
of his army should join with him, he would not turn his back upon Adel
or Mara, till he had either forced them to tribute and submission, or
extirpated them, and annihilated their religion.

He then entered the tent-door, and took the sacrament from the hands
of the monk, in presence of the whole army. All the principal officers
did the same, and every individual of the army, with repeated shouts,
declared, that they acceded to, and were bound by, the oath the king
then had made. A violent fury spread in this instant through the whole
army; they considered that part of the king’s speech as a reproach,
which mentioned the spoils they had taken to have been bought by the
blood of Christians, their brethren. Every hand laid hold of a torch,
and, whether the plunder was his own or his fellow-soldiers, each
man set fire, without interruption, to the merchandise that was next
him. The whole riches of Ifat and Hadea, Fatigar and Dawaro, were
consumed in an instant by these fanatics, who, satisfied now that they
were purged from the impurity which the king had attributed to their
plunder, returned poor to their standards, but convinced in their own
conscience of having now, by their sacrament and expiation, become the
soldiers of Christ, they thirsted no longer after any thing but the
blood of the inhabitants of Adel and Mara.

Soon after, Amda Sion heard that the Moors had attacked his army in
Ifat two several nights, and that his troops had suffered greatly, and
with difficulty been able to maintain themselves in their camp. The
king was then upon his march when he heard these disagreeable news; he
hastened, therefore, immediately to their relief, and encamped at night
in an advantageous post, short of his main army, with a view of taking
advantage of this situation, if the Moors, as he expected, renewed
their attack that night for the third time.

The Abyssinians, to a man, are fearful of the night, unwilling to
travel, and, above all, to fight in that season, when they imagine
the world is in possession of certain genii, averse to intercourse
with men, and very vindictive, if even by accident they are ruffled or
put out of their way by their interference. This, indeed, is carried
to so great a height, that no man will venture to throw water out
of a bason upon the ground, for fear that, in ever so small a space
the water should have to fall, the dignity of some elf, or fairy,
might be violated. The Moors have none of these apprehensions, and
are accustomed in the way of trade to travel at all hours, sometimes
from necessity, but often from choice, to avoid the heat. They laugh,
moreover, at the superstitions of the Abyssinians, and not unfrequently
avail themselves of them. A verse of the Koran, sewed up in leather,
and tied round their neck or their arms, secures them from all
these incorporeal enemies; and, from this known advantage, if other
circumstances are favourable, they never fail to fight the Abyssinians
at or before the dawn of the morning, for in this country there is no
twilight.

The Moors did not, in this instance, disappoint the king’s expectation;
as they, with all possible secrecy, marched to the attack of the camp,
while the king, having refreshed his troops, put himself in motion
to intercept them; and they were now arrived, and engaged in several
places with very great vigour. The camp was in apparent danger, though
vigorously defended. At this moment the king, with his fresh troops,
fell violently upon their rear; and, it being known to the Moors that
this was the king, they withdrew their army with all possible speed,
carrying with them a very considerable booty.

The success which had followed these night expeditions, above all,
the small loss that had attended the pursuit, even after they were
defeated, from the perfect knowledge they had of the country, inspired
them with a resolution to avoid pitched battles, but to distress and
harrass the king’s army every night. They accordingly brought their
camp nearer than usual to the king’s quarters. This began to be felt by
the army, which was prevented from foraging at a great distance; but
provisions could not be dispensed with. The king, therefore, detached
a large body of horse and foot that had not been engaged or fatigued.
The greatest part of the foot he ordered to return with the cattle
they should have taken, but the horse, with each a foot-soldier behind
him, he directed to take post in a wood near a pool of water, where
the Moorish troops, after an assault in the night, retired, and took
refreshments and sleep by the time the sun began to be hot. The Moors
again appeared in the night, attacked the camp in several places, and
alarmed the whole army; but, by the bravery and vigour of the king, who
every where animated his troops by his own example, they were obliged
to retreat a little before morning, more fatigued, and more roughly
handled, than they had hitherto been in any such expedition.

The king, as if equally tired, followed them no further than the
precincts of his camp; and the Moors, scarcely comforted by this
forbearance after so great a loss, retreated to receive succour of
fresh troops as usual, and enjoy their repose in the neighbourhood of
shade and water. They had, however, scarce thrown aside their arms,
disposed of their wounded in proper places, and begun to assuage their
thirst after the toils of the assault, when the Abyssinian horse,
breaking through the covert, came swiftly upon them, unable either to
fight or to fly, and the whole body of them was cut to pieces without
one man escaping.

The king, upon return of his troops, began to consider, and, by
combining various circumstances in his mind, to suspect strongly, that,
from the Moors attacking him, as they had for some time lately done,
always in the most unfavourable circumstances, there must be some
intelligence between his camp and that of the enemy. Upon examining
more particularly into the grounds of this suspicion, three men of
Harar (who had long attended the army as spies) were discovered, and
being convicted, were carried out, and their heads cut off at the
entrance of the camp; after which the king, who now found himself
without an enemy in these parts, struck his tents, and returned to Gaza
in Dawaro.

This movement of Amda Sion’s had more the appearance of opening a
campaign than the closing of one, and occasioned great discontent among
the soldiers, who had done their business, and were without an enemy,
just at that time that the rains fall so heavy, and the country becomes
so unwholesome as to make it unadvisable to keep the field. They,
therefore, remonstrated by their officers to the king, that they must
return to their houses for the several months of winter which were to
follow; and that, after the fatigues, dangers, and hardships they had
undergone for so many months, to persist in staying longer at such a
season in this country was equal to the condemning them to death.

Gimmel-eddin, moreover, the new-appointed governor, insisted with
Amda Sion, that he was able enough himself to keep all the tributary
provinces in peace, and true allegiance to the king; but if, on the
contrary, the king chose to eat them up with a large army living
constantly among them, as well as upon every pretence laying them
waste with the sword in the manner he was now doing, he could not be
answerable for, nor did he believe they would be able to pay him,
the tribute he expected from them. But the king, who saw the motives
both of his officers and of the Moorish governor, continued firm in
his resolutions. He sharply reproved both Gimmel-eddin and his army
for their want of discipline, and desire of idleness, and ordered the
officers to acquaint their men, that, if they were afraid of rains,
he would carry them to _Adel_, where there were _none_; that, for his
part, he made a resolution, which he would keep most steadily, never
to leave his camp and the field while there was one village in his own
dominions that did not acknowledge him for its sovereign.

Accordingly on the 13th day of June 1316, immediately after this
declaration, he struck his tents, and marched into Samhar, to
disappoint, if possible, the confederacy that some of the principal
Moorish states had entered into against him, which were agreed, one by
one, to harrass his camp by night, and, after having obliged him to
retreat to Shoa in disorder, to give him battle there before he had
time to refresh his troops. The authors of this conspiracy were seven
in number, Adel, Mara, Tico, Agwama, Bakla[5], Murgar, and Gabula,
and they had already collected a considerable army. The king, who saw
they persisted in their nightly attacks, rode out, thinly accompanied,
to choose a post for an encampment that was to give him the greatest
advantage over his enemy; and, whilst thus occupied, he was suddenly
surrounded by a body of troops of Adel lying in ambush for him. A
soldier (in appearance an Abyssinian) came so close to the king as to
strike him with his sword on the back with such violence that it cut
his belt in two, and, having wounded him thro’ his armour, was ready to
repeat the blow, when the king pierced him through the forehead with
his lance, upon which his party fled.

But the Moors, for five successive nights, did not fail in their
attempts upon his camp, which wearied and greatly contributed to
discontent his men; and the more so, because the enemy declined coming
to any general engagement, though the king frequently offered it to
them. Amda Sion, therefore, decamped the 28th of June, and, leaving
this disadvantageous station, advanced a day’s march nearer Mara,
pointing, as it were, to the very center of that kingdom. But here,
again, he was stopt by the discontent of his soldiers, who absolutely
refused to go farther, or spend the whole season in arms, in this
inclement climate, while the rest of his subjects, in full enjoyment of
health and plenty, were rioting at home.

This disposition of his army was no sooner known to the king than he
called the principal of them together, and, planting himself on a
rising ground, he began to harangue his soldiers with so much eloquence
and force of reasoning, that they who before had only learned to
admire their king as a soldier, were obliged to confess that, as an
orator, he as much excelled every man in his state, as he did the
lowest man of his kingdom in dignity. He put his soldiers in mind,
“that this was not a common expedition, like those of his predecessors,
marching through the country for the purpose of levying their revenue;
that the intention of the present war was to avenge the blood of so
many innocent Christians slain in security and full peace, from no
provocation but hatred of their religion: that they were instruments
in the hand of God to revenge the death of so many priests and monks
who had been wantonly offered as sacrifices upon their own altars: that
they were not a common army, but one confederated upon oath, having
sworn upon the sacrament, at the passage of the river Hawash, that they
would not return into Abyssinia till they had beat down and ruined the
strength of the Mahometans in those kingdoms; so that now, when every
thing had succeeded to their wishes, when every Mahometan army had
been defeated as soon as it presented itself, and the whole country
lay open to the chastisements they pleased to inflict, to talk of a
retreat or forbearance was to make a mockery at once of their oath, and
the motive of their expedition. He shewed, by invincible reasonings,
the great hardships and danger that would attend his retreat through a
country already wasted and unable to maintain his army; what an alarm
it would occasion in Shoa, to find him returning with an enemy at his
heels, following him to his very capital; that such, however, must be
the consequence; for it was plain, that, though the enemy declined
fighting, yet there was no possibility of hindering them from following
him so near as to give his retreat every appearance of flight, and to
bring an expedition, begun with success, to an ignominious and a fatal
end.

“He upbraided them with his own example, that early their prophets had
foretold he was a prince fond of luxury and ease, which, in the main,
he did not deny, but confessed that he was so; and that they all should
have an attachment to their pleasures and enjoyments, he thought but
reasonable. He desired, however, in this, they would do as much as he
did, and only suspend their love of ease and rest as long as their duty
to God, to their country, and their murdered brethren, required; for,
till these duties were fulfilled, ease and enjoyment to a Christian,
and especially to them bound by oath to accomplish a certain purpose,
was, in his eyes, little short of apostacy.” A loud acclamation now
followed from the whole army. They declared again, that they renewed
their sacrament taken at the passage of the Hawash, that they were
Christ’s soldiers, and would follow their sovereign unto death.

Though the great personal merit of the king, and the grace, force,
and dignity with which he spoke, had, of themselves, produced a very
sudden change in the mind of the soldiers, yet, to the increase of this
good disposition it had very much contributed, that a monk, of great
holiness and austerity of manners, living in a cell on the point of
a steep rock, had come down from Shoa to the camp, declaring that he
had found it written in the Revelation of St John, that this year the
religion of Mahomet was to be utterly extirpated throughout the world.
Full of this idea, on the feast of Ras Werk, in the month of July,
the army passed the Yass, a large river of the kingdom of Mara, and
encamped there. The troops were alarmed, the night after their arrival,
by a piece of intelligence which proved a falsehood.

A woman, whose father had been a Christian, said, that she had very
lately left the Moorish camp; that the enemy were at no great distance,
and only waited a night of storm and rain to make a general attack
upon the king’s army; and the clouds threatening then a night of
foul weather, it was not doubted but the engagement was thereupon
immediately to follow. It blew, then, so violent a storm, that the
king’s tent, and most of those in the camp, were thrown down, and the
soldiers were in very great confusion, imagining, every moment, the
Moors ready to fall on them. But whether the story was a falsehood, or
the storm too great for the Moors to venture out, nothing happened that
night, nor, indeed, during their stay in that station.

At this time a number of priests and others came out of curiosity to
see their king making conquests of provinces and people till then
unknown to them even by name: several large detachments of fresh troops
from Abyssinia also arrived, and joined the army. Upon this, Amda Sion
advanced a day’s journey farther into Mara, and took a strong post,
resolving to maintain himself there, and, by detachments, lay the whole
country desolate. This place is called _Dassi_. There was neither
river, however, nor spring near it, but only water procured by digging
in the sand, being what comes down from the sides of the mountains in
the rainy season, and, having filtered through the loose earth, has
reached the sand and gravel, where it stagnates, or finds slowly its
level to the sea. Here the king was taken dangerously ill with the
fever of the Kolla.

The altercations between Amda Sion and his soldiers, and the
resolutions taken in consequence of these, were faithfully carried to
the king of Adel. The march of the king forward at such a season of
the year, the slow pace with which he advanced towards the very heart
of the country, the care he took of providing all necessaries for his
army, and his reinforcing it at such a season, all shewed this was no
partial, sudden incursion, but that it was meant as a decisive blow,
fatal to the independence of these petty sovereigns and states. To this
it may be added, that Gimmel-eddin, whom the king had released from
prison, and set over the Moorish provinces of Abyssinia, conveyed to
them, in the most direct manner, that such were the king’s purposes. He
told them, moreover, this march into their country was not either to
increase their tribute, or for the sake of plunder, or to force them
to be his subjects; that Amda Sion’s main design was against their
religion, which he and his soldiers had vowed they were to destroy;
that it was not their time to think of peace or tribute upon any terms;
for, were they even to sell their wives and children, the price would
not be accepted, unless they forsook the religion of their fathers,
and embraced Christianity. He further added, that _his_ resolution was
already taken, that he would die firm in the faith, a good Mahometan,
as he had lived; not tamely, however, but in the middle of his enemies;
and that he was now making every sort of preparation to resist to the
latest breath.

No sooner was this intelligence from Gimmel-eddin published, than a
kind of frenzy seized the people of Adel; they ran tumultuously to
arms, and, with shrieks and adjurations, demanded to be led immediately
against the Abyssinians, for they no longer desired to live upon such
terms.

There was among the leading men of the Moors one Saleh, chief of a
small district called Cassi, by birth a Sherriffe, _i. e._ one of the
race of Mahomet, and who, to the nobility of his birth, joined the
holiness of his character. He was _Imam_, as it is called, or _high
priest_ of the Moors, and, for both these reasons, held in the greatest
estimation among them. This man undertook, by his personal influence,
to unite all the Moorish states in a common league. For it is to be
observed, that, though religion was very powerful in uniting these
Moors against the Christians, yet the love of gain, and jealousies of
commerce, perpetually kept a party alive that favoured the king for
their own interest, in the very heart of the Moorish confederacies and
councils. To overcome this was the object of Saleh, and he succeeded
beyond expectation, as sixteen kings brought 40,000 men into the field
under their several leaders; but the chief command was given to the
king of Adel.

I MUST put the reader in mind that I am translating an Abyssinian
historian. These, then, whom this chronicle stiles Kings, must be
considered as being only hereditary and independent chiefs, not
tributary to Abyssinia. Their names are Adel, Mara, Bakla, Haggara,
Fadise, Gadai, Nagal, Zuba, Harlar, Hobal, Hangila, Tarshish, Ain,
Ilbiro, Zeyla, and Eftè. Now, when we consider that these sixteen kings
brought only 40,000 men, and that they were commanded under these
sixteen by 2712 leaders, or governors of districts, all which are set
down by name, we must have a very contemptible opinion of the extent
and populousness of these newly-erected kingdoms.

It appears to me unnecessary to repeat, after my historian, the names
of each of these villages, which probably do not now exist, and are,
perhaps, utterly unknown. I shall only observe in passing, that here
we find Tarshis, or Tarshish, a kingdom on the coast of the ocean,
directly in the way to Sofala; another strong presumption that Sofala
and Ophir were the same, and that this is the Tarshish where Solomon’s
fleet stopt when going to Ophir.

Amda Sion’s fever hindering him to march forward, and being unwilling
to risk a battle where he was not able himself to command, he continued
close in his strong camp at Dassi, waiting his recovery; but, in the
mean time, he made considerable detachments on all sides to lay the
country waste around him, till he should be able to advance farther
into it.

Of all the royal army, as it stood upon the establishment, the king had
only with him the troops from the provinces of Amhara, Shoa, Gojam,
and Damot, and these were what composed the rear, when the whole,
called the royal army, was assembled; all his troops were regularly
paid, well armed, and cloathed, and were not only provided with every
necessary, but were become exceedingly rich, and, therefore, the more
careless of discipline, and difficult to manage, on account of the
repeated conquests that had followed one another ever since the king
had crossed the river Hawash, and come into the desert kingdom of
Mara, unfruitful in its soil, but flourishing by trade, and rich in
India commodities. The soldiers had here so loaded themselves with
spoils and merchandise, that they began rather to think of returning
home, and enjoying what they had got, than of pushing their conquests
still farther to the destruction of Adel and Mara. The putrid state of
the water, in this sultry and unwholesome climate, had afflicted the
king with the fever of the country, which he thought not by any means
to remedy or prevent. No consideration could keep him from exposing
himself to the most violent sun-beams, and to the more noxious vapours
of the night; and it was now the seventh day his fever had been
increasing, although he neither ate nor drank. The army expecting, from
the king’s illness, a speedy order to return, conversed of nothing else
within their camp, with that kind of security as if they had already
received orders to return home.

The Mahometan army had assembled, and no news had been brought of it
to the king. Saleh’s influence had united them all; and the king’s
sickness had made this easier than it otherwise would have been. It
happened, then, that, the king’s fever abating the ninth day, he sent
out to procure himself venison, with which this country abounds, and
which is believed, by people of all ranks in Abyssinia, to be the
only proper food and restorative after sickness. After having killed
sufficiently for the king’s immediate use, the huntsmen returned; two
only remained, who continued the pursuit of the game through the woods,
till they were four days journey distant from their camp, when, being
in search of water for their dogs, they met a Moor engaged in the
same business with themselves, who shewed them his army encamped at
no considerable distance, and in very great numbers. Upon this they
returned in all haste to the king to apprize him of his danger, and
he sent immediately some horse to discover the number, situation, and
designs of the enemy; above all, if possible, to take a prisoner, for
the huntsmen had put theirs to death, that he might be no incumbrance
to them upon their return.

The king’s fever was now gone, but his strength was not returned; and,
the necessity of the case requiring it, he attempted to rise from his
bed and put on his armour, but, fainting, fell upon his face with
weakness, while his servant was girding his sword.

The horse now returned, and confirmed the tidings the huntsmen had
brought; they had found the Moorish army in the same place it was
first discovered, by the water-side; but the account of their number
and appearance was such that the whole army was struck with a panic.
The king’s wives (as the historian says, by which it should appear he
had more than one) endeavoured to persuade him not to risk a battle
in the weak state of health he then was, but to retire from this
low, unwholesome country, and occupy the passes that lead into Upper
Abyssinia, so as to make it impossible for the enemy to follow him into
Shoa.

The king having washed and refreshed himself, with a countenance full
of confidence, sat down at the door of his tent: whilst officers and
soldiers crowded about him, he calmly, in the way of conversation, told
them,--“That, being men of experience as they were, he was surprised
they should be liable, at every instant, to panic and despondency,
totally unworthy the character of a veteran army. You know,” said he,
“that I came against the king of Adel, and to recover that province,
one of the old dependencies of my crown. And though it has happened
that, in our march, you have loaded yourselves with riches, which I
have permitted, as well out of my love to you, as because it distresses
the enemy, yet my object was not to plunder merchants. If in battle
to-morrow I be beaten, for God forbid that I should decline it when
offered, I shall be the first to set you the example how to die like
men in the middle of your enemies. But while I am living, it never
shall be said that I suffered the standard of Christ to fly before
the profane ensigns of infidels. As to what regards our present
circumstances, my sickness, and the number of the Moorish troops, these
make no alteration in my good hopes that I shall tread upon the king
of Adel’s neck to-morrow. For as it was never my opinion that it was
my own strength and valour, or their want of it, which has so often
been the means of preserving me from their hands, so I do not fear at
present that my accidental weakness will give them any advantage over
me, as long as I trust in God’s strength as much as ever I have done.”

The army, hearing with what confidence and firmness the king spake,
began to look upon his recovery as a miracle. They all, therefore,
with one accord, took to their arms, and desired to be led forward to
the enemy, without waiting till they should come to them. They only
beseeched the king that he would not expose his person as usual, but
trust to the bravery of his troops, eager for action, without being
lavish of that life, the loss of which would be to the Mahometans
a greater victory than the regaining all he had conquered. The king
hereon, bidding his troops to be of good courage, take rest and
refreshment, sent away the women, children, and other incumbrances, to
a small convent on the side of the mountain, called _Debra Martel_[6];
and, being informed of the situation of the country in general, and
the particular posts where he could get water in greater plenty, he
advanced with his army by a slow march towards the enemy.

The next day he received intelligence by a Moor, that the Mahometans
had not only thrown poison into all the wells, but had also corrupted
all the water in the front of the army by various spells and
inchantments; that they were not advancing, but were waiting for troops
from some of the small districts of Adel that had not yet joined the
army. Hereupon the king ordered his Fit-Auraris to advance a day
before him, and sent a priest, called _Tecla Sion_, with him, that he
might bless and consecrate the water, and thereby free it from the
inchantments of the Moors. He himself followed with his army, and sat
down by a small river a short way distant from the enemy.

The Fit-Auraris is an officer that commands a party of men, who go
always advanced before the front of an Abyssinian army, at a greater or
smaller distance, according as circumstances require. His office will
be described more at large in the sequel.

The king being arrived at the river, the army began to bathe
themselves, their mules, and their horses, in the same manner as is
usual throughout all Abyssinia on the feast of the Epiphany. This
lustration was in honour of Tecla Sion, who had consecrated the water,
broken all the magic spells, and changed its name to that of the river
Jordan. But, while they were thus employed, the Fit-Auraris had come
up with a large party of the enemy, and, with them, a number of women,
provided with drugs to poison and inchant the water; and this numerous
body of fanatics had fallen so rudely on the Fit-Auraris that it beat
him back on the main body, to whom he brought the news of his own
defeat.

A violent panic immediately seized the whole Abyssinian army, and they
refused to advance a step farther. The tents had been left standing
on the side of the river they first came to, and they then passed to
the other side. But, upon sight of the Fit-Auraris, they returned to
the tents, that, having the river on their front, they might fight the
enemy with more advantage if they came to attack them. They did not
continue long in this resolution; the greatest part of them were for
leaving their tents, and retiring to Abyssinia for assistance, and,
when the numbers should be more upon an equality, return to fight the
enemy. The Moorish army at this instant coming in sight, increased the
number of converts to this opinion.

The king, in the utmost agony, galloping through the ranks, continued
to use all manner of arguments with his mutinous soldiers. He told
them, that retiring to their camp was to put themselves in prison;
that, being mostly composed of horse, their advantage was in a plain
like that before them; that retreating to join the main body, at such a
distance, was a vain idea, as the enemy was so close at their heels.
Finally, all he desired of them was, that those who would not fight
should only stand as spectators, but not leave their places. As no sign
of content or conviction was returned, the king, seeing that all was
lost if they disbanded, the enemy being just ready to engage, ordered
his master of the horse, and five others, to attack the left wing of
the enemy, while he, with a small part of his servants and household,
did the same on the right.

The Abyssinian history, seldom just to the memory of individuals, hath
yet, in this instance, (almost a single one), preserved the names of
these brave men. The first was Zana Asferi; the second, Tecla; the
third, Wanag Araad; the fourth, Saif Segued, (one of the king’s sons;)
the fifth, Badel Waliz; and the sixth, Kedami. These, as is supposed
with their attendants and servants, (though history is silent but as to
the six) fell furiously on the left of the Mahometan army.

The king, at the first onset, killed, with his own hand, the two
leaders of the right wing; and his son, Saif Segued, having also slain
another considerable officer on the left, a panic seized both these
bodies of Moors, and the army apparently began, at one and the same
time, to waver: On which the Abyssinians, now ashamed of their conduct,
and perceiving the king’s danger, with a great shout fell furiously
upon the enemy. The whole Moorish army having, by this time, joined,
the battle was fought with great obstinacy on both sides, till first
the center, then the left wing of the Moors, was broken and dispersed;
but the right, consisting chiefly of strangers from Arabia, kept
together, and, not knowing the country, retired into a narrow deep
valley surrounded by steep perpendicular rocks, covered thick with
wood.

The Abyssinian army, thinking all at an end by the flight of the
Moors, began, after their usual custom, to plunder, by stripping and
mangling the bodies of the killed and wounded. But the king, who,
from the mistake of the Arabians, saw the destruction of this right
wing certain, if immediately pursued, ordered it every where to be
proclaimed through the field, that the whole army should repair to
the royal standard, which he had set up on an eminence, and give over
plundering, under pain of death. Finding this order, however, slackly
obeyed, he himself, scouring the field at the head of a few horse,
with his own hand slew two of his soldiers whom he found stripping the
dead without regard to his proclamation. This example from a prince,
exceedingly sparing of the blood of his soldiers, had the effect to
recal them all to the royal standard displayed on a rising ground.

He then separated his army into two divisions; all the foot, and those
of his horse that had principally suffered in the severe engagement of
the day, he led up to the mouth of the valley where the right wing of
the Arabians had shut themselves up; and, having beset all access to
the entrance of it, he ordered the foot to climb up through the woods,
and on every side surround the valley above the heads of those unhappy
people thus devoted to certain destruction.

While this was doing, the king ordered those of the cavalry that had
suffered least in the fatigue of the day, to refresh themselves and
their horses. He knew no time was lost by this, as the Moorish army
that escaped from the engagement, worn out with fatigue, thirst, and
hunger, would only retire a short day’s march to the water, where,
finding themselves not pursued, and incumbered with the number of their
wounded, they would necessarily rest themselves; and this was precisely
the situation, in which his huntsmen first found them by the side of a
large pool of water.

The king gave the command of this part of his army to the master of
the horse, with orders to pursue them one day farther; whilst he,
having taken a short refreshment, began to attack the right wing of
the Arabians shut up in the valley. The king, dismounting, led the
attack against the front of the Arabians, who, seeing their situation
now desperate, began to make every effort to get from the valley into
the plain. But they did not know yet upon what disadvantageous ground
they were engaged, till the soldiers from the rocks above, every way
surrounding them, rolled down immense stones which passed through them
in all directions. Pressed, therefore, violently, by the king in their
front, and in the rear destroyed by an enemy they neither could see
nor resist, they fell immediately into confusion, and were, to a man,
slaughtered upon the spot; upon which the king, giving to his troops
orders for a general plunder, retired himself to his camp, and in his
tent received from the master of the horse an account of his expedition.

This officer had proceeded slowly, spreading his troops as wide as
possible upon the tract of the retreating enemy, to give a smaller
chance for any to escape. All directed their flight towards the pool
of water, and were there destroyed without mercy, till a little after
sun-set. The pursuers had then advanced to the ground where Saleh king
of Mara had gathered the scattered remains of his once powerful army,
but now overcome with heat, dispirited by their defeat, and worn out
by the fatigues of a long and obstinate engagement, all that remained
of these unfortunate troops were strowed upon the ground, lapping
water like beasts, their only comfort that remained, equally incapable
of fighting or flying. The master of the horse, in great vigour and
strength from his late refreshments and recent victory, had no trouble
with these unfortunate people but to direct their execution, and this
was performed by the soldiers with all the rage and cruelty that a
difference of religion could possibly inspire. For, after the king’s
speech of the 9th of June, in which he upbraided them with breach of
their oath, and that they were slow in avenging the blood of their
brethren and priests wantonly slain by the Moors, every man in the army
measured the exactness with which he acquitted himself of the sacrament
at the Hawash, only by the quantity of blood that he could shed. Weary
at last with butchery, a few were taken prisoners, and among these was
Saleh king of Mara. It was evening before the king returned from the
slaughter of the right wing; and it was night when the soldiers, as
fatigued with plundering as with fighting, returned to the camp.

The next morning, he heard of the success of his cavalry under the
master of the horse, who joined him before mid-day. The unfortunate
Saleh was, in sight of the whole army, brought before the king,
cloathed in the distinguished habit and marks of his dignity in which
he had fought the day before at the head of his troops; gold chains
were about his arms, and a gold collar, enriched with precious stones
about his neck. The king scarcely deigned to speak to him, whilst the
royal prisoner likewise observed a profound silence. When the army had
satisfied their curiosity with the sight of this prince, (once the
object of their fear), the king, by a motion of his hand, ordered him
to be hanged upon a tree at the entrance of the camp, with all the
ornaments he had upon him. After this the queen of Mara, concerning
whom so many surprising stories had been told of her poisoning the
waters by drugs and inchantments, was, notwithstanding the known
partiality of this king for the fair sex, ordered to be hewn in pieces
by the soldiers, and her body given to the dogs.

Amda Sion then dispatched a messenger with the news of his victory to
the queens his wives, and the rest of the ladies he had left with the
main army at Debra Martel, when the monks of the convent immediately
began a solemn procession and thanksgiving, attended by the exercise of
every sort of work of charity and piety.

It was now the end of July, when the rains in Abyssinia become both
constant and violent, that the king called a council of the principal
nobility, officers, and priests, to determine whether he should go
straight home, or send their wives, children, and baggage before them
the direct road, when the light and unincumbered army should take a
compass, and lay waste a part of the kingdom of Adel they had already
invaded, and return in another direction. The majority of the army, and
the priests above all, were for the first proposal; but the king and
principal officers thought the advantages gained by so much blood were
to be followed, and not deserted, till they should either have reduced
the Mahometans to a state of weakness that should make them no longer
formidable to Abyssinia, or, if prosperous fortune still attended them
further, extirpate the people and religion together.--This opinion
prevailed.

The king, therefore, dismissed his baggage, his women, children,
servants, and useless people. He retained an army of veteran soldiers
only, more formidable than six times the number that could be brought
against them; and, trusting now to the country into which he marched
for support, he advanced, and entered a town called Zeyla, and there
took up his quarters. He had scarce taken possession of the town, when
that very night he sent a detachment to surprise a large and rich
village called Taraca, where he put all the men to the sword, making
the women slaves for the service of the army, instead of those whom he
had sent home.

The king’s views, by such small expeditions, were to accustom his
soldiers to fight out of his presence, and wean them from a persuasion,
now become general, that victory could not be obtained but where he
commanded.

On the 10th of July, the king continued his march, without opposition,
to Darbè, whence, the next morning, he sent different parties to the
right and left, to burn and destroy the country. They accordingly laid
waste all the province of Gassi, slaying Abdullah the Sherriffe, who
was the governor and son of Saruch the Imam, author of the conspiracy
against him. From thence he fell suddenly upon Abalgé and Talab, a
large district belonging to the king of Adel.

This prince, hearing that Amda Sion, instead of returning, as was
usual in the rainy season, into Abyssinia, had determined to continue
to ravage his whole country, had not, on his part, been remiss in
preparing means to resist him; and he had assembled, from every
province, all the forces they could raise, to make one last effort
against their common enemy.

Amda Sion, therefore, had scarcely retired from the destruction of
Talab, when the king of Adel (become now desperate by being so long a
spectator of the ruin of his kingdom) marched hastily to meet him, with
much less precaution than his own situation, and the character of his
enemy, required. Amda Sion, whose whole wish was to bring the Moors to
an engagement as often as occasion presented, left off his plundering
upon the first news that the king of Adel had taken the field, and,
allowing him to choose the ground on which he was to fight, the next
day he marched against him, having (as sure of victory) first detached
bodies of horse to intercept those of the Moors that should fly when
defeated; For no general was more provident than this king for the
destruction of his enemy. He then led his troops against the king of
Adel, and, spurring his horse, was already in the midst of the Moorish
army before the most active of his soldiers had time to follow him. The
Abyssinians, as usual, threw themselves like madmen upon the Moors,
at the sight of the king’s danger. The king of Adel was defeated with
little resistance: that unfortunate prince himself was slain upon the
spot, and the greatest part of his army destroyed (after they thought
themselves safe) by the ambushes of fresh horse the king had placed in
their rear before the battle.

The three children of the king of Adel, and his brother, who had all
been in the engagement, seeing the great inferiority of their troops,
and terrified at the approaching fate of their country, loading
themselves with the most valuable of their effects, (which, in token
of humility, they carried upon their heads, shoulders, and in their
hands,) came with these presents before the king, who was sitting armed
at the door of his tent, and, without further apology, or assurance
given, threw themselves, as is the custom of Abyssinia, at his feet,
with their foreheads in the dust, intreating pardon for what had
hitherto been done amiss; submitting to him as his subjects, professing
their readiness to obey all his commands, provided only that he would
proceed no further, nor waste and destroy their country, but spare what
still remained, which was, for the most part, the property of Arabian
merchants who had done him no injury.

But the king seemed little disposed to credit these assurances. He told
them plainly, “That they, and all Ethiopia, knew the time was when they
were under his dominion, paid him the same tribute, and owed him the
same allegiance with the rest of his subjects; that neither he, nor
his predecessors, at that time, had ever oppressed them, but returned
them present for present, gold for gold, apparel for apparel, and
dismissed them contentedly home whenever they came to pay their duty
to them: That lately, from supposed weakness in him, when he was young
in the beginning of his reign, and encouraged by the great addition
of their brethren, who flocked to them from Arabia, they had, without
provocation, thrown off their allegiance to him, upbraiding him as a
eunuch, fit only to take care of the women of their seraglio, with many
such taunting messages, equally unworthy the majesty and memory of a
prince like him: That, could this be passed over, still there was a
crime that all the blood of Adel could not atone for: They had, without
provocation, murdered his priests, burnt their churches, and destroyed
his defenceless people in their villages, merely from a vain belief
that they were too far to be under his protection: That, to punish them
for this, he was now in the midst of their country, and, if his life
was spared, never would he turn his back upon Adel while he had ten men
with him capable of drawing their swords. He, therefore, ordered them
to return, and expect the approach of his army.”

The two eldest children and the brother were so struck with the fierce
manner and countenance with which the king spoke, that they remained
perfectly silent. But the youngest son (a youth of great spirit, and
who, with the utmost difficulty, had been forced by his parents to fly
after the battle) answered the king with great resolution:--

“It is a truth known to the whole kingdom, that Adel has never belonged
to any sovereign on earth but to ourselves. Violence and power, which
destroy and set up kingdoms, have at times done so with ours; but that
you are not otherwise, than by these means, king of our country, our
colour, stature[7], and complexion sufficiently shew. We have been
free, and were conquered; we now have attempted to regain our freedom,
and we have failed: We have not been inferior to you in every kind of
civility, receiving you and your predecessors when you came into our
country, singing before you, and rejoicing, because we knew that you
had always among you men of great worth and bravery.

“As to the accusation against us, that we robbed the Christians,
you yourself see the riches of our country, which we get by our own
industry and commerce, whilst the Abyssinians were naked shepherds and
robbers. In the days of your predecessors, a handful of us would have
chased an army of them, and it would be so now, were it not for the
personal valour and conduct of you their prince. But you, better than
any one, can be the judge of this; and I can appeal to you, how often
they have been upon the point of deserting you, in return for all the
victories and riches they have shared with you; while there is not a
Moor in Adel but would have willingly died in the presence of such a
prince as you. It is then _you_, not your army, that we fear; we know
perfectly the value of both. You have already enjoyed all the merit
and profit of conquest; but utterly destroying defenceless people is
unworthy of any king, and still more of a prince of your character.”

The king, without any sign of displeasure at the freedom of this
speech, answered him calmly: “Words and resolutions like these
occasioned your father to lose his life in battle. I come not to argue
with you what you are to do, nor did I send for you to preach to you;
but if the queen your mother, the rest of your father’s family, and the
principal people who, after your father’s death, are now to govern
Adel, do not, by to-morrow evening, surrender themselves to me at my
tent-door, as you have done, I will lay the province of Adel waste,
from the place where I now sit, to the borders of the ocean.”

This unpromising interview with the king was faithfully communicated by
the young princes to their mother, earnestly desiring her to trust the
king’s mercy, and to throw herself at his feet the next morning without
reserve. But those who had been the persuaders of the war (for the late
king of Adel was but a weak prince) reckoned themselves in much greater
danger with Amda Sion than was the royal family. They, therefore,
agreed to try their fortune again in battle, binding themselves to
live and die with each other, by mutual oaths and promises. They also
sent to the princes this resolution, by an old enemy of Amda Sion,
persuading them to make their escape as soon as possible, and come and
head their forces that were then raised, and ready to conquer or die
together, when the family should be out of the enemy’s hands.

The king, well informed of what had passed, decamped immediately from
the station where he was, exceedingly irritated; and, having passed
the great river called Aco, he took post in the town of Marmagab;
and the next day, dividing his army, he sent two bodies by different
routes into the enemy’s territories, with a strict command to leave
nothing undestroyed that had the breath of life; he himself, with the
third division, burning and laying waste the whole country before him,
proceeded straight to the place where he heard the chiefs of Adel were
assembling an army. There he found some troops, mostly infantry, who
kept a good countenance, and seemed perfectly prepared and disposed
to engage him. But an immense multitude of useless people covered the
plain, old men, women, and children, with the parents, wives, and
families of those he had already slain; and these were determined, with
the remnant of their countrymen, to conquer this invader, or to perish.

The king, upon perceiving this strange mixture, halted for a time in
great surprise and astonishment. He could not penetrate into the motive
of assembling such an army; and sending a party of horse, as it were,
to disperse them, he found everywhere a stout resistance; soldiers
well provided with swords and shields, and a multitude of archers, who
rained showers of arrows upon him, while the women, with clubs, poles,
stakes, and stones, damped the ardour of his soldiers, who, when they
first charged, scarcely expected resistance. The king, seeing the
battle every minute become more doubtful, and having but few troops,
began to repent that he had weakened his army by detachments; he
instantly dispatched orders to them to advance, and fall upon the enemy
in the nearest direction possible. At the same time, he himself made an
extraordinary effort with his horse, but all in vain; and he found, on
every side, people who presented themselves willingly to death, but who
would not quit their station while they had power to defend themselves
in it.

Conspicuous above all these for his dress, his youth, his many acts
of valour, and his graceful figure, was the young king of Wypo, who,
encouraging his troops, presented himself wherever Amda Sion was in
person. The remarkable resistance that this young prince made, soon
drew the attention of the king of Abyssinia; who, sheathing his
sword, took a bow in his hand, and, as my historian says, choosing the
broadest arrow he could find, struck this young hero through the middle
of his neck, so that, half being cut through, his head inclined to one
shoulder, and soon after he fell dead among his horse’s feet.

This sight was one just calculated to strike such an army as this with
terror. They immediately turned their backs, and, unluckily falling in
with the two detachments marching to the king’s relief, they were all
cut to pieces to the number of 5000; a great proportion of which were
women and aged persons, unskilled in war, further than as they were
prompted by a long sufferance of injuries, accumulated now to a mass,
that made them weary of life. My historian further says, that three
only of the Moorish army escaped. On the king’s side many principal
officers were killed; and there was scarce one horseman that was not
wounded. Amda Sion, therefore, when speaking of this campaign, after
his return, among his nobility at Shoa, used to say, “Deliver me from
fighting with old women;” alluding to this battle, where he was in
the greatest danger. The fate of the unfortunate king of Wypo was
particularly hard. He had lately married the king of Adel’s daughter;
and it was the staying for him, and his marriage, that lost the
favourable opportunity of fighting the Abyssinians, when the army was
in despondency upon the king’s being taken ill of the fever.

The next campaign the king began, by a march first to Sassogade, where
he assisted at the celebration of the feast of St John the Baptist; and
he gave orders, that day, to raze all the Mahometan mosques to the
ground, to destroy all the grain, burn the villages, and put the people
to the sword, which was executed accordingly. The king then decamped
the fourth of July; and, passing the great river (Zorat) came to the
country of the Oritii, and took up his quarters there. The people of
this province were in the very worst reputation for cruelty, and hatred
of the Christian name. They were perpetually making incursions into the
Christian villages, and those that fell alive into their hands, they
either castrated, cut off their nose or ears, or otherwise mangled them.

The king, to vindicate the severity he was about to exercise, ordered
all those people, who had suffered in this manner, to be collected and
brought before him. The number appeared very considerable; and, having
inquired in what occupations they had been employed, they answered,
that their business was to cut down wood, draw and fetch water, and
some of them to take care of the Moorish women. Violently affected with
this, he called his principal officers, and commanded them, that, when
he decamped with his army the next day, small parties should remain
in ambush on each side of the town. The king, early in the morning,
marched out with sound of trumpet; and the Moors, thinking the army
gone, returning to their houses, were set upon by the parties, and
destroyed.

The next place the king came to was Haggara, where he staid eight
days, and celebrated there the feast of the Cross; surrounding his
camp with palisades, as if he was to stay there a considerable time.
Here he made his soldiers deposit all their plunder, leaving it under
the care of a weak guard, and marched out with sound of trumpet, as
if he was going upon some expedition. There was a large body of troops
in ambush, and the Moors, concealed in woods, and hiding-places,
attacked the intrenchment as soon as the king was gone, and had forced
the palisades, when they were every where surrounded by the parties
left behind, and were all cut to pieces, excepting the old men and
women, whose noses and lips the king ordered to be cut off, by way of
retaliation, and then dismissed them. Great store of bows, good arms
and cloathing, were taken here, lately brought from Arabia for the use
of the confederates.

The king now turned his face homewards, marched off in seven days to
Begul in the Sahara, and thence sent a message to the governor of Ifat,
commanding him to send to him all those Christians who had apostatized
from their faith in his or his brother’s time; with notice, that, if
he did not comply, he would put him and all his family to death, and
give his command to another family. The king ordered these apostates,
when delivered, to be severely whipped, and, fettering them with heavy
irons, imprisoned them.

From Begul the army marched to Waz, thence to Gett, and from Gett to
Harla, still laying waste the country. From Harla they marched five
days to Delhoya, being determined to make a severe example of this
place, because the inhabitants had killed the governor the king had
left with them, and, making large fires for the purpose, had burnt and
tormented the Christians residing there. He came, therefore, upon this
town, and surrounded it in the night; and, after putting men, women,
and children to the sword, he razed it to the ground.

From Delhoya he proceeded to Degwa, from thence to Warga, which he
treated in the same manner as Delhoya, and then entered the province
of Dawaro, where he understood that Hydar, governor of that province,
with Saber-eddin, and a very valuable convoy coming to him, under their
conduct, from Shoa, were intercepted by Hydar’s people, and their
guard cut to pieces. Instead, therefore, of proceeding to Shoa, as
his intention was, he encamped at Bahalla, and there kept the feast
of Christmas, laying the whole province, by parties, under military
execution; and hearing there that Joseph, governor of Serca, was in
understanding with those of Dawaro, he put him in prison, carrying
off all his horses, asses, mules, and a prodigious quantity of other
cattle, which he drove before him, and ended his expedition by his
entry into Shoa.

This is the Abyssinian account of the reign of their prince Amda Sion,
a little abridged, and made more conformable to the manner of writing
English history. The historian, contrary to the usual practice, gives
no account of himself; but he seems to have lived in the time of Zara
Jacob, the third reign after this. Though he wrote in Shoa, his book is
in pure Geez, there being scarcely an Amharic word in it.

There are three things which I would now observe; not because they are
single instances, but, on the contrary, because, though first mentioned
here, they are uniformly confirmed throughout the whole Abyssinian
history.

The first is, that the king of Abyssinia is, in all matters
ecclesiastical and civil, supreme; that he punishes all offences
committed by the clergy in as absolute and direct a manner as if these
offences were committed by a layman. Of this the treatment of Honorius
is an example, who made use only of spiritual weapons against offences,
that surely deserved the censure of all churches.

With whatever propriety this sentence might have been inflicted upon
individuals, and, perhaps, without any bad consequence to the public in
general, the law of the land, in Abyssinia, could not suffer this to be
inflicted on their king, because very bad effects must have followed it
towards the common-weal; for excommunication there is really a capital
punishment if executed with rigour. It is a kind of _interdictio aquæ
et ignis_, for you yourself are expressly prohibited from kindling a
fire, and every body else is laid under a prohibition from supplying
either fire or water. No one can speak, eat, or drink with you, enter
your house, or suffer you to enter theirs. You cannot buy nor sell, nor
recover debts. If under this situation you should be violently slain by
robbers, no inquisition is made into the cause of your death, and your
body is not suffered to be buried.

I would submit now to the judgment of any one, what sort of government
there would be in Abyssinia, if a priest was suffered to lay the king
under such interdict or restriction. The kings of that country do
not pretend to be saints; indeed, it may be said, they are the very
contrary, leading very free lives. Pretences are never wanting, and it
is only necessary to find a fanatic priest (which, God knows, is not a
rarity in that country) to unhinge government perpetually, and throw
all into anarchy and confusion. But nothing of this kind occurs in
their history, though the bigotted Le Grande, and some of the Jesuits,
less bigotted than him, have asserted, that such a practice prevailed
in the Abyssinian church, to shew its conformity with the church
of Rome; which we shall see, however, contradicted almost in every
prince’s reign.

The second thing I shall observe is, that there is no ground for that
prejudice, so common in the writers concerning this country, who say
that these people are Nomades, perpetually roving about in tents. If
they had ever so little reflected upon it, there is not a country in
the world where this is less possible than in Abyssinia, a country
abounding with mountains, where every flat piece of ground is, once
a-day, during six months rain, cut through by a number of torrents,
sweeping cattle, trees, and every thing irresistibly before them; where
no field, unless it has some declivity, can be sown, nor even passed
over by a traveller, without some danger of being swept away, during
the hours of the day when the rain is most violent; in such a country
it would be impossible for 30 or 40,000 men to encamp from place to
place, and to subsist without some permanent retreat. Accordingly they
have towns and villages perched upon the pinnacles of sharp hills and
rocks, and which are never thought safe if commanded by any ground
above them; in these they remain, as we do in cities, all the rainy
season: Nor is there a private person (not a soldier) who hath a tent
more than in Britain. In the fair season, the military encamp in all
directions cross the country, either to levy taxes, or in search of
their enemy; but nothing in this is particular to Abyssinia; in most
parts of Africa and Asia they do the same.

The third particular to be observed here is, that, in this prince’s
reign, the king’s sons were not imprisoned in the mountain. For Saif
Araad was present with his father at the defeat of Saleh king of Mara,
and yet the mountain of Geshen was then set apart as a prison. For
the Itchegué of Debra Libanos was banished there; from which I infer,
that after the massacre of the royal family by Judith, on the mountain
of Damo, and the flight of the prince Del Naad, to Shoa, the king’s
children were not confined, nor yet till long after their restoration
and return to Tigré, as will appear in the sequel.

Amda Sion died of a natural death at Tegulat in Shoa, after a reign of
30 years, which were but a continued series of victories, no instance
being recorded of his having been once defeated.

[Illustration]




SAIF ARAAD.

From 1342 to 1370.

_This Prince enjoys a peaceable Reign--Protects the Patriarch of Cophts
at Cairo from the Persecution of the Soldan._


Saif Araad succeeded his father Amda Sion; and it should seem that,
in his time, all was peaceable on the side of Adel, as nothing is
mentioned relative to that war. Indeed, if the increase of trade and
power in that corner of Abyssinia arose from the troubles and want of
security which the merchants laboured under in Arabia, we cannot but
suspect, from a parity of reasoning, that the violent manner in which
war had been carried on by Amda Sion, must have occasioned a great many
inhabitants to repass the Straits, and return to their own homes.

At this time, news were brought from Cairo, that the Soldan had thrown
the Coptic patriarch, Marcus, into prison. There was then a constant
trade carried on between Cairo and Abyssinia, through the desert; and
also from Cairo and Suakem on the Red Sea. Besides, great caravans,
formerly composed of Pagans, now of Mahometans, passed from west to
east, in the same manner as in ancient times, to buy and disperse India
goods through Africa. Saif Araad, not having it in his power to give
the patriarch other assistance, seized all the merchants from Cairo,
and sent horse to interrupt and terrify the caravans. As the cause of
this was well known, and that the patriarch was in prison for the sake
only of extorting money from him, people on all sides cried out upon
the bad policy of the Soldan, who thereupon ordered Abuna Marcus to be
set at liberty, without any other condition, than that he should make
peace with Saif Araad on the part of Egypt, which was done through the
mediation of that prelate.

[Illustration]




WEDEM ASFERI.

From 1370 to 1380.

_Memoirs of this and the following Reign defective._


We know nothing of this prince, only that he succeeded his father Saif
Araad, and reigned ten years; yet his name, which signifies _lover
of war_, seems to indicate an active reign. It is remarkable, that
in this reign is first mentioned an æra of Abyssinian chronology,
which has very much puzzled several learned writers, and the origin
of which is not, perhaps, yet fully known. This is that epoch, called
that of Maharat, or Mercy, which Scaliger and Ludolf have called the
æra of grace. Scaliger says, he has toiled much before he found out
what it was; and I doubt his toil has not been blessed with all the
success we could wish. That it is not the æra of redemption, is plain
upon a hundred trials, nor of the conversion, nor of Dioclesian. What
it alludes to we know not, but it is first quoted in the Abyssinian
history in this reign, and answers to the year 1348 of Christ; but
from what event it had its origin we cannot positively say, nor
further, than that all which Scaliger has said concerning it is merely
visionary.

[Illustration]




DAVID II.

From 1380 to 1409.


Wedem Asferi was succeeded by his brother David, Saif Araad’s second
son. This prince’s reign is remarkable in the annals of the church of
Abyssinia, because, at this time, a piece of the true cross, on which
our Saviour died, was brought hither from Jerusalem; and, in memory of
this great event, the king ordered the sacerdotal vest, or capa, which
was before plain, to be embroidered with flowers.

This king, after reigning twenty-nine years, one day viewing a
favourite, but vicious horse, received so violent a kick upon his head
that it fractured his skull, so that he died upon the spot, and was
buried in the great island of Dek in the lake Dembea, or Tzana.

[Illustration]




THEODORUS.

From 1409 to 1412.

_Memoirs of this Reign, though held in great Esteem in Abyssinia,
defective; probably mutilated by the Ecclesiastics._


David was succeeded by his eldest son Theodorus. He is called Son of
the Lion, by the poet, in the Ethiopic encomium upon him, still extant
in the liturgy. A miracle is mentioned to have happened, (which would
lead us to suspect that he was a saint), during the celebration of
his festival, by his mother, who is called Mogessa[8]. This lady had
contented herself with providing great quantity of flesh for the feast;
but, to make it more complete, the heavens in a shower supplied it with
store of fine fish, ready roasted.

He was buried in the church of Tedba Mariam in Amhara, after having
reigned three years. There must have been something very brilliant
that happened under this prince, for though the reign is so short,
it is before all others the most favourite epoch in Abyssinia. It is
even confidently believed, that he is to rise again, and to reign in
Abyssinia for a thousand years, and in this period all war is to cease,
and every one, in fulness, to enjoy happiness, plenty, and peace.
Foolish as these legends are, and distant the time, this one was the
source of great trouble and personal danger to me, as will be seen in
the sequel. What we know certain in this prince’s history is, that he
abrogated the treaty of partition made by Icon Amlac in favour of the
Abuna Tecla Haimanout and his successors, by which one third of the
kingdom of Abyssinia was for ever to be set apart as a revenue for the
Abuna. This wise prince modified so excessive a provision, reserving to
the Abuna for his maintenance a sufficient territory in every province
of the kingdom. It is still judged immoderate, and has suffered many
defalcations under later princes, who, perhaps, not acting upon the
principles of Theodorus, have not been commended by posterity in the
manner he has been.

[Illustration]




ISAAC.

From 1412 to 1429.

_No Annals of this nor the four following Reigns._


Theodorus was succeeded by Isaac his brother, second son of David.
In his reign the Falasha, who, since their overthrow in the time of
Amda Sion, had been quiet, broke out into rebellion. We do not know
the particulars, but apprehend some injustice was at that time done,
or attempted, against the Jews; for 24 Judges, 12 from Shoa and 12
from Tigré, (the number having been doubled when there were two kings
reigning[9]), were of a different opinion, and would not comply with
the king’s will, who thereupon deprived them all of their office. The
king, coming upon the army of the Falasha in Woggora, entirely defeated
them at Kossogué, and, in memory thereof, built a church on the place,
and called it Debra Isaac, which remains there to this day.

Isaac reigned near 17 years, was a prince of great piety and courage.
The annals of his reign, probably during the troublesome time that
followed, have been lost, and with them great part of his atchievements.

[Illustration]




ANDREAS I. OR AMDA SION.


Isaac was succeeded by his son Andreas, who reigned only seven months,
and they were both buried at Tedba Mariam.

[Illustration]




TECLA MARIAM, OR HASEB NANYA.

From 1429 to 1433.


This prince was third son of David, and succeeded his nephew. He
reigned four years, and took for his inauguration name, Haseb Nanya.

[Illustration]




SARWE YASOUS.


This prince was son of Tecla Mariam, he reigned only four months; his
inauguration name was Maharak Nanya. He has been omitted in some of the
lists of kings.

[Illustration]




AMDA YASOUS.


Sarwe Yasous was succeeded by his brother Amda Yasous, whose
inauguration name was Badel Nanya. He was second son of Tecla Mariam,
and reigned nine months.

[Illustration]




ZARA JACOB.

From 1434 to 1468.

    _Sends Ambassadors from Jerusalem to the Council of
    Florence--First Entry of the Roman Catholics into Abyssinia,
    and Dispute about Religion--King persecutes the Remnants of
    Sabaism and Idolatry--Mahometan Provinces rebel, and are
    subdued--The King dies._


These very short reigns were followed by one of an extraordinary
length. Zara Jacob, fourth son of David II. succeeded his nephew,
and reigned 34 years, and, at his inauguration, took the name of
Constantine. He is looked upon in Abyssinia to have been another
Solomon; and a model of what the best of sovereigns should be. From
what we know of him, he seems to have been a prince who had the best
opportunity, and with that the greatest inclination to be instructed in
the politics, manners, and religion of other countries.

A convent had been long before this established at Jerusalem for the
Abyssinians, which he in part endowed, as appears by his letters still
extant[10], written to monks of that convent. He also obtained from
the Pope[11] a convent for the Abyssinians at Rome, which to this day
is appropriated to them, though it is very seldom that either there,
or even at Jerusalem, there are now any Abyssinians. By his desire,
and in his name, ambassadors (_i. e._ priests from Jerusalem) were
sent by Abba Nicodemus, the then Superior, who assisted at the council
of Florence, where, however, they adhered to the opinion of the Greek
church about the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, which created a schism
between the Greek and Latin churches. This embassy was thought of
consequence enough to be the subject of a painting in the Vatican, and
to this picture we owe the knowledge of such an embassy having been
sent.

The mild reign of the last Soldan of Egypt seems greatly to have
favoured the disposition of Zara Jacob, in maintaining an intercourse
with Europe and Asia. And it is for the first time now in this reign
that we read of a dispute upon religion with the Franks, or Frangi,
a name which afterwards became more odious and fatal to whomsoever
it was applied. Abba George is said to have disputed before the king
upon some point of his religion, and to have confuted his opponent
even to conviction. We are not informed of the name of Abba George’s
antagonist, but he is thought to have been a Venetian painter[12], who
lived many years after in Abyssinia, and, it is believed, died there.
From this time, however, in almost every reign, there appear marks of
a party formed in favour of the church of Rome, which probably had its
first rise from the Abyssinian embassy to the council of Florence.

Although the established religion in Abyssinia was that of the Greek
church of Alexandria, yet many different superstitions prevailed in
every part of the country. On the coast of the Red Sea, as well as
the Ocean, that is in the low provinces adjoining to the kingdom of
Adel, the greatest part of the inhabitants were Mahometans; and the
conveniencies of trade had occasioned these to disperse themselves
through many villages in the high country, especially in Woggora, and
in the neighbourhood of Gondar. Dembea on the south, and the rugged
district of Samen on the east, were crowded with many deformed sects,
while the people of the low valleys, towards Nubia, the Agows at the
head of the Nile, and those of the same name, though of a different
nation and language, at the head of the Tacazzé, in Lasta, were, for
the greatest part, Pagans, _i. e._ of the old religion of Sabeans,
worshipping the planets, stars, the wind, trees, and such like. But a
more abominable worship than this seemed especially predominant among
some of the Agows at the source of the Nile, and the people bordering
upon Nubia, as they adored the cow and serpents for their gods, and
supposed that, by the latter, they could divine all that was to happen
to them in futurity.

Whether it was that a long war had thrown a veil over these abuses,
or whether (which is more probable) a spirit of toleration had still
prevailed in this country, which had at first been converted to
Christianity without blood-shed, it is not easy at this time to say.
Only their history does not mention, that, before the reign of this
prince, idolatry had been considered as a capital crime, or judicially
inquired into, and tried as such. An accusation, however, at this time,
being brought against some families for worshipping the cow and the
serpent, they were, by the king’s orders, seized and brought before
himself sitting in judgment, with the principal of his clergy, and
with his officers of state, with whom he associated some strangers,
lately come from Jerusalem; a custom which prevails to this day. These
criminals were all capitally convicted, and executed. A proclamation
from the king followed, declaring, That any person who did not, upon
his right hand, carry an amulet, with these words, _I renounce the
devil for Christ our Lord_, should forfeit his personal estate, and be
liable to corporal punishment.

It has been the custom of all Pagan nations to wear amulets upon their
arms, and different parts of their bodies. From the Gentiles this usage
was probably first learned by the Jews. Amulets were adopted by the
Mahometans, but, till now, not worn in Abyssinia by any Christians.

These executions, which at first consisted of seven people only, began
to be repeated in different places, and at different times. The person
employed as inquisitor, and the manner this examination was made,
tended to make it still more odious. Amda Sion, the Acab Saat, was the
man to whom this persecution was committed. He was the king’s principal
confident; of very austere manners: he neither shaved his head nor
changed his cloaths; had no connection with women, nor with any great
man in court; never saw the king but alone, and, when he appeared
abroad, was constantly attended by a number of soldiers, with drums and
trumpets, and other equipage, not at all common for a clergyman. He
had under him a number of spies, who brought him intelligence of any
steps taken in idolatry or treason; and, after being, as he supposed,
well informed, he went to the house of the delinquent, where he
first refreshed himself and his attendants, then ordered those of the
house he came for, and all that were with them, to be executed in his
presence.

Among those that suffered were the king’s two sons-in-law, married to
his daughters Medehan Zamidu, and Berhan Zamidu, having been accused
by their wives, the one of adultery, the other of incest: they were
both put to death in their own houses, in a very private and suspicious
manner. This execution being afterwards declared by the king in an
assembly of the clergy and states, certain priests, or others, from
Jerusalem, in public, condemned this procedure of the king, as contrary
to law, sound policy, and the first principles of justice, which seems
to have had such an effect that we hear no more of these persecutions,
nor of Amda Sion the persecutor, during the whole of this reign.

The king now turned his thoughts upon a nobler object, which was that
of dividing his country into separate governments, assigning to each
the tax it should pay, at what time, and in what manner, according to
the situation and capacity of each province. The prosperity of the
Moorish states, from the extensive trade constantly carried on there,
the bad use they made of their riches by employing them in continual
rebellions, made it necessary that the king should see and inquire into
each person’s circumstances, which he proposed to do, as was usual,
before the time of their several investitures.

The chief of the rich district of Gadai, was the first called on by the
king, as it is on this occasion that considerable presents (seldom
less than two years rent of the province) are given, about one half to
the king, the other among his courtiers. There was, at this period, a
Moorish woman of quality in court, called the queen of Zeyla. She had
been brought to the palace with a view that the king should marry her,
but he disliking her for the length, as is said, or some other defect,
in her foreteeth, had married her to a nobleman.

This injury had sunk very deep in the breast of the queen of Zeyla,
though she was only nominally so, having been expelled from her kingdom
before her coming into Abyssinia. But it happened that she was sister
to Mihico son of Mahomet, chief of Gadai, whom she earnestly persuaded
to stay at home, and she succeeded so far, as not only to prevail
upon him to be absent, but also to withdraw himself entirely from his
allegiance.

At this very time, the king was informed by a faithful servant, a
nobleman of Hadea, that the chief of Gadai had long been meditating
mischief, and endeavouring to prevail with the king of Adel to march
with his army, while great part of the principal people of Hadea, whom
he had seduced, were to fall, on the opposite side, upon Dawaro and
Bali.

The king, however, received certain accounts from Adel, that all was
quiet there; and inquiring who of his Moorish servants were of the
conspiracy in Hadea, he found them to be Goodalu, Alarea, Ditho, Hybo,
Ganzè, Saag, Gidibo, Kibben, Gugulé, and Haleb. As there were still
forces enough in the province to resist this confederacy, the king,
instead of levying an army against them, thought the proper way was
to send them a governor, who should divide the interest and strength
of the enemy. There was then an uncle of Mihico remaining in exile at
Dejan[13], whither he had been sent formerly into banishment at the
instance of his nephew, but he still preserved the command of a small
district called Bomo, as well as the good inclinations of his own
subjects of Gadai, who held his memory in great veneration. The king,
therefore, sent for this governor of Bomo, and, setting before him the
behaviour of his nephew, he gave him the investiture of his government,
with many presents both useful and honourable; and, having ordered some
troops from Amhara to attend him, he dismissed him, to punish and expel
his nephew from the province of Gadai.

The fair of Adel was nigh, and thither all the inhabitants of Bali
and Dawaro go. It was at this time the conspirators of Hadea had
agreed to fall upon the provinces; while, probably, those at the fair
had been likewise destined to cut off the inhabitants which might be
found there. To counteract these designs, the king, by proclamation,
expressly forbade any of the inhabitants of Bali or Dawaro to go to the
fair, but all to join the governor of Bomo, who no sooner presented
himself in his district, than the people of all ranks flocked to him
and submitted.

Mihico saw himself undone by this address of the king, of which he was
quite uninformed. He fled immediately with his family, endeavouring,
if possible, to reach Adel; and having come the length of Bawa Amba,
a high mountain, where is one of the narrowest and most difficult
passes between the high country and the Kolla, here he strowed about,
in different places, all the riches that he had brought along with
him, in hopes that his pursuers, wearied by the time they came there,
should, by the difficulty of the ground, and the booty everywhere to
be found, be induced to proceed no further. But this stratagem did
not succeed; for he was so closely followed that he was overtaken and
slain, his head, hands, and feet were cut off, and immediately sent
to the king, who, after public rejoicings, gave the government of
Gadai to the person who first informed him of Mihico’s conspiracy, and
confirmed the governor of Bomo in the province of Hadea likewise, which
he made hereditary in his family. In order also to be more in readiness
to suppress such insurrections for the future, he gave his Christian
soldiers lands adjacent to each other, forming a line all along the
frontiers of the Mahometan provinces of Bali, Fatigar, Wadge, and
Hadea, that they might be ready at an instant to suppress any tumult in
the provinces themselves, or resist any incursions from the kingdom of
Adel.

The king now set about fulfilling another duty of his reign, that of
repairing the several churches in Abyssinia which had been destroyed
in the late war by the Mahometans, and of building new ones, which it
is their constant custom to vow and to erect where victories had been
obtained over an infidel enemy. While thus employed, news were sent him
from the patriarch of Alexandria, that the church of the Virgin had
been destroyed at that city by fire. Full, therefore, of grief for this
misfortune, he immediately founded another in Abyssinia, to repair
that loss which Christianity had suffered in Egypt.

Being now advanced in life, he would willingly have dedicated the
remainder of it to these purposes, when he was awakened from his
religious employments by an alarm of war. The rebels of Hadea, by
changing their chief, had not altered their dispositions to rebel,
and, seeing the king given to other pursuits, they began to associate
and to arm. The governor, whom the king had created after the death of
Mihico, gave the king a very late notice of this, which he dissembled,
as he was the queen Helena’s father: but having, under pretence of
consecrating the church of St Cyriacos, assembled a sufficient number
of men whom he could trust, he made a sudden irruption into the rebel
provinces before they had united their forces. The first that the king
met to oppose him was an officer of the rebel governor of Fatigar,
who imagined he was engaging only the van of a separate body of Zara
Jacob’s troops, not believing him to be yet come up in person with
so small a number: But being undeceived, he bestirred himself so
courageously, that he reached the king’s person, and broke his lance
upon him; but, in return, received a blow from the lance of the king
which threw him to the ground; at the sight of which his whole party
took flight, but were overtaken and put to the sword almost to a man;
nor was the king’s loss considerable, his number being so small.

Upon this defeat, Hiradin, the governor’s brother, declared his revolt,
and advanced to fight the king at the passage of the river Hawash. Zara
Jacob, much offended at this fresh delinquency, sent an officer, called
Han Degna, who found him at the watering-place unsuspecting an enemy;
and, before he could put his army in order, he was surrounded, slain,
and his head sent to the king, who rejoiced much at the sight, it being
brought him on Christmas day.

After this the king collected his dead, and buried them with great
honour and shew of grief. He then summoned the governor of Hadea,
who professed himself willing to submit his loyalty and conduct to
the strictest inquiry. Above all the reasons which hindered him from
attending the king, one was known to be, that the queen was not without
reason suspected to favour the Mahometans, being originally of that
faith herself, and, therefore, for fear of revealing his secret to the
enemy, the king did not choose to make her father, the governor of
Hadea, partaker in his expedition, but, from jealousy to the queen,
ordered him to stay at home. Notwithstanding which it was found, that
all in his government were in their allegiance, and ready to march upon
the shortest notice had the king required it; therefore he extended his
command over the conquered provinces, in room of the rebel governors
whom he had removed.

[Illustration]




BÆDA MARIAM.

From 1468 to 1478.

    _Revives the Banishment of Princes to the Mountain--War with
    Adel--Death of the King--Attempts by Portugal to discover
    Abyssinia and the Indies._


Bæda Mariam succeeded to the throne (as his historian says) against his
father’s inclination, after having received much ill usage during the
earlier part of his life, of which this was the occasion. His mother
took so violent and irregular a longing to see her son king, that
she formed a scheme, by the strength of a party of her relations and
friends, trusting to the weakness of an old man, to force him into a
partnership with his father. Examples of two kings, at the same time,
and even in this degree of relation, were more than once to be found
in the Abyssinian annals, but those times were now no more. A strong
jealousy had succeeded to an unreasonable confidence, and had thrown
both the person and pretensions of the heirs-apparent of this age to as
great a distance as was possible.

The queen, whose name was Sion Magass, or the Grace of Sion, first
began to tamper with the clergy, who, though they did not absolutely
join her in her views, shewed her, however, more encouragement than was
strictly consistent with their allegiance. From these she applied to
some of the principal officers of state, and to those about the king,
the best affected to her son and his succession. These, aware of the
evil tendency of her scheme, first advised her, by every means, to lay
it aside; and afterwards, seeing she still persisted, and afraid of a
discovery that would involve her accomplices in it, they disclosed the
matter to the king himself, who resented the intention so heinously,
that he ordered the queen to be beaten with rods till she expired.
Her body afterwards was privately buried in a church dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, not far from Debra Berhan[14].

Nothing had hitherto appeared to criminate the young prince. But it
was soon told the king, that, after the death of the queen, her son
Bæda Mariam had taken frankincense and wax-tapers from the churches,
which he employed, at stated times, in the observation of the usual
solemnities over his mother’s grave. The king, having called his son
before him, began to question him about what he had heard; while
the prince, without hesitation, gave him a full account of every
circumstance, glorying in what, he said, was his duty, and denying that
he was accountable to any man on earth for the marks of affection which
he shewed to his mother.

The king, considering his son’s justification as a reproach made to
himself for cruelty, ordered the prince, and, with him, his principal
friend Meherata Christos, to be loaded with irons, and banished to
the top of a mountain; and it is hard to say where this punishment
would have ended, had not the monks of Debra Kosso and Debra Libanos,
and all those of the desert, (who thought themselves in some measure
accomplices with his mother), by exhortations, pretended prophecies,
dreams and visions, convinced the king, that Providence had decreed
unalterably, that none but his son, Bæda Mariam, should succeed him.
To this ordinance the old king bowed, as it gave him a prospect of the
long continuance of his family on the throne of Abyssinia.

Zara Jacob was no sooner dead, than his son, Bæda Mariam, who succeeded
him, began to apply himself seriously to the affairs of government.
From the reign of Judith, (in the tenth century), when so many of the
princes of the royal family were massacred, the custom of sending
the royal children to confinement on the top of a mountain had been
discontinued. These children all lived at home with their respective
fathers and mothers, like private persons; and the kings seemed to
connive at abolishing their former practice, for no mountain had been
yet chosen as a substitute to the unfortunate Damo. The disagreement
between Zara Jacob and his queen, with the cause of it, and the
prince’s frankness and resolution, seemed to point out the necessity of
reviving the salutary severity of the ancient laws. Bæda Mariam gave
orders, therefore, to arrest all his brethren, and send them prisoners
for life to the high mountain of _Geshen_, on the confines of Amhara
and Begemder, which ever after continued the state-prison for the royal
children, till a slaughter, like to that made upon mount Damo, was the
occasion, as we shall see, of deserting Geshen likewise.

The king applied himself next to measures for the better government
of his country. He ordered a general pardon to be proclaimed to all
who, by the severity of the late reign, lay under sentence of death,
banishment, or any other punishment; and, convoking the states of the
kingdom, he met them with a chearfulness and openness which inspired
confidence into every rank, while, at the same time, he filled all the
places he found vacant, or that he thought proper to change, with men
of the greatest integrity. He then reviewed the whole cavalry that were
in his service, which he distributed into bodies, and stationed them in
places where they could be readiest called, to execute those designs he
had then in contemplation.

The next year the king went to Debra Libanos in Shoa. It was, however,
observed, that his preparations were not such as were usual in these
short journies, nor such as were made in peaceable times. On the
contrary, orders were sent to the borders of Tigré to receive the
royal army, which was soon to arrive in those parts. The rumour of
this was quickly spread abroad, and affected all the neighbouring
states, according to their several interests. Mahomet king of Adel was
the first that took the alarm. Tho’ a kind of peace had subsisted for
several years between Adel and Abyssinia, yet inroads had been made
from each country into the other; and these might have served them as
pretexts for war, had that been the inclination of the times. Yet, as
both countries happened to be disposed for peace, these outrages passed
unnoticed.

But, to prevent surprise upon this last movement of the troops, the
king of Adel thought he had a right to be informed of Bæda Mariam’s
intentions, and, with this view, he sent some of the principal people
of his country as ambassadors, under pretext of congratulating the king
upon his accession to the throne. They met the king in Shoa, and had
carried with them very considerable presents. They were received in a
very distinguished manner; and the presents which Bæda Mariam returned
to the king of Adel were nothing inferior to those he accepted. After
having entertained the ambassadors several days with feasting and
diversions, he confirmed a peace under the same duties upon trade that
had formerly subsisted.

The king of Dancali also, old, infirm, yet constant in his attachment
to the Abyssinians, was not without his inquietudes, though he was
not afraid they intended to attack his poor territory with an army.
He dreaded lest the army in its march should drink up that little
quantity of water which remained to him in summer, and, without which,
his kingdom would become uninhabited. It is a low, sandy district,
lying on the Red Sea, just where the coast, after bearing a little to
the east of north from Suez to Dancali, makes an elbow, and stretches
nearly east, as far as the Straits of Babelmandeb. It has the mines of
fossile-salt immediately on the north and north-west, a desert part of
the province of Dawaro to the south, and the sea on the north. But it
has no port, excepting a spacious bay, with tolerable anchorage, called
_the Bay of Bilur_[15], in lat. 13° 3´, and, corruptly in vulgar maps
and writings, the Bay of Bayloul.

The kingdom of Dancali is bounded on the east at Azab by part of the
kingdom of Adel, and the myrrh country. The king is a Mahometan, as
are all his subjects. They are called Taltal, are all black, and only
some of them woolly-headed; a circumstance which probably arises from
a mixture with the Abyssinians, whose hair is long. There are but two
small rivers of fresh water in the whole kingdom; and even these are
not visible above ground in the hot season, but are swallowed up in the
sand, so as to be dug for when water is wanted. In the rainy season,
these are swollen by rain falling from the sides of the mountains and
from the high lands of Abyssinia, and then only they run with a current
into the sea. All the rest of the water in this country is salt, or
brackish, and not fit for use, unless in absolute necessity and dry
years. Even these sometimes fail, and they are obliged to seek, far off
in the rainy frontiers of Abyssinia, water for themselves, and pasture
for their miserable goats and sheep.

When the Indian trade flourished, this prince’s revenue arose chiefly
from furnishing camels for the transport of merchandise to all parts
of Africa. Their commerce is now confined to the carrying bricks of
solid, or fossile salt, dug from pits in their own country, which,
in Abyssinia, pass instead of silver currency; these they deliver at
the nearest market in the high lands at a very moderate profit, after
having carried them from the sea-side through the dry and burning
deserts of their own country, at the great risk of being murdered by
Galla.

The presents sent to Bæda Mariam from Dancali did not make a great
figure when compared with those of Adel. They consisted of one horse,
a mule, a shield of elephant’s hide, a poisoned lance, two swords, and
some dates. Poor as these presents were, they were much more respected
than those of Adel, because they came from a loyal heart; while the
others were from a nation distinguished every year by some premeditated
action of treachery and bloodshed. The king, having first sent for
the Abuna, Imaranha Christos, and called the ambassadors of Dancali
and Adel into his presence, declared to them, that neither of these
states was to be the scene of war, but that he was instantly to march
against the Dobas[16], whose constant inroads into his country, and
repeated cruelties, he was resolved no longer to suffer. He required
the ambassadors to warn their masters to keep a strict neutrality,
otherwise they would be infallibly involved in the same calamities with
that nation.

Lent being now near, the king returned to Ifras, there to keep his
fast, and distributed his horse on the side of Ambasanet, having sent
orders to the governor of Amhara to join him immediately, who was
then at Salamat besieging a party of rebels upon Mount Gehud, which
signifies the _Mountain of Manifestation_. It was the intention of the
king, that the troops of Amhara, Angot, and Tigré should press upon
the enemy from the high country, while he with his own troops (chiefly
horse) should cut off their retreat to the plains of salt; and it was
here that the king of Dancali was afraid that they would interfere with
his fresh water.

This prince kept strictly his promise of secrecy made to Bæda Mariam,
while the king of Adel observed a very different line of conduct; for
he not only discovered the king’s intention, but he invited the Dobas
to send their wives, children, and effects into Adel, while his troops
should cut off the king’s provision, and fight him wherever they saw
that it could be done with advantage. The plan was speedily embraced.
Twelve clans of Dobas marched with their cattle, as privately as
possible, for Adel; but the king’s intelligence was too good, and his
motions too rapid, to allow their schemes to be carried into execution.
With a large body of horse, he took possession of a strong pass, called
Fendera; and when that unhappy people, fatigued with their march, and
incumbered with baggage, arrived at this spot, they were cut to pieces
without resistance, and without distinction of age or sex.

The king, at the beginning of this campaign, declared, that his
intention was not to carry on war with the Dobas as with an ordinary
enemy, but totally to extirpate them as a nuisance; and, to shew
himself in earnest in the declaration, he now made a vow never to
depart from the country till he had plowed and sown the fields, and ate
the crop on the spot with his army. He, therefore, called the peasants
of two small neighbouring districts, Wadge and Ganz, and ordered them
to plow and sow that part; which having seen done, the king went to
Axum, but returned again to the Dobas, by the feast of the Epiphany.
That cruel, restless nation, saw now the king’s real intent was their
utter destruction, and that there was no possibility of avoiding it
but by submission. This prudent conduct they immediately adopted; and,
great part of them renouncing the Pagan religion, they so satisfied
Bæda Mariam that he decamped from their country, after having, at his
own expence, restored to them a number of cattle equal to that which
he had taken away, having also given up, untouched, the crop which had
been sown, and recompensed the peasants of Wadge and Ganz for their
corn and labour.

Having resolved to chastise the king of Adel for his treacherous
conduct, he retired southward into the provinces Dawaro and Ifat; and,
as if he had had no other views but those of peace, he crossed over
to Begemder, where he directed the Abuna to meet him with his young
son Iscander, of whom his queen, Romana Werk[17], had been lately
delivered. From this he proceeded to Gojam, everywhere leaving orders
with the proper officers to have their troops in readiness against his
return; and having delivered the young prince to Ambasa David, governor
of that province, he proceeded to Gimbota, a town lying on the banks
of the Nile, which, in honour of his son’s governor, he changed to
David Harasa[18]. Having thus settled the prince to his mind, he sent
orders to the army in Tigré and Dawaro to advance into the southernmost
frontier of Adel. He himself returned by the way he went to Gojam, and
collecting the troops, and the nobility who flocked to him on that
occasion, he marched straight for the same country.

Whilst the king was occupied in these warlike preparations, a violent
commotion arose among his clergy at home. In the reign of Zara Jacob,
a number of strangers, after the council of Florence, had come into
Abyssinia with the Abuna Imaranha Christos. Among these were some monks
from Syria, or Egypt, who had propagated a heresy which had found many
disciples. They denied the consubstantiality of Christ, whom they
admitted to be perfect God and likewise perfect man, but maintained
that what we call his _humanity_ was a precious substance, or nature,
not composed of flesh, blood, and arteries, (like ours), but infinitely
more noble, perfect, peculiar to, and only existing in himself. An
assembly of the clergy was called, this heresy condemned, and those
who had denied the perfect manhood of our Saviour were put to death by
different kinds of torture. Some were sent to die in the Kolla, others
exposed, without the necessaries of life, to perish with cold on the
tops of the highest mountains.

There was another motive of discontent which appeared in that assembly,
and which affected the king himself. A Venetian, whose name was
Branca Leon, was one of the strangers that arrived in Ethiopia at the
time above mentioned. He was a limner by profession, and exceedingly
favoured by the late king, for whom he had painted, with great
applause, the pictures of Abyssinian saints for the decoration of the
churches. It happened that this man was employed for an altar-piece of
Atronsa Mariam; the subject was a common one in Italy, Christ in his
mother’s arms; where the child, according to the Italian mode, is held
in his mother’s left arm. This is directly contrary to the usage of
the East, where the left hand is reserved for the purpose of washing
the body when needful, and is therefore looked upon with dishonour, so
much, indeed, that at table the right hand only is put into the plate.

The fanatic and ignorant monks, heated with the last dispute, were
fired with rage at the indignity which they supposed was offered to
our Saviour. But the king, struck with the beauty of the picture, and
thinking blood enough had been already shed upon religious scruples,
was resolved to humour the spirit of persecution no farther. Some of
the ringleaders of these disturbances privately disappearing, the
rest saw the necessity of returning to their duty; and the picture
was placed on the altar of Atronsa Mariam, and there preserved,
notwithstanding the devastation of the country by the Moors under the
reigns of David III. and Claudius, till many years afterwards, together
with the church, it was destroyed by an inroad of the Galla.

In the mean time, the army from Dawaro had entered the kingdom of Adel
under Betwudet[19] Adber Yasous, and, expecting to find the Moors quite
unprepared, they had begun to waste every thing with fire and sword.
But it was not long before they found the inhabitants of Adel ready to
receive them, and perfectly instructed of the king’s intentions, from
the moment he left Dawaro, to go to meet his son in Gojam. Indeed,
it could not be otherwise, from the multitude of Moors constantly in
his army, who, though they put on the appearance of loyalty, never
ceased to have a warm heart towards their own religion and countrymen.
Advanced parties appeared as soon as the Abyssinian army entered the
frontiers; and these were followed by the main body in good order,
determined to fight their enemy before they had time to ravage the
country.

A battle immediately followed, very bloody, as might be expected from
the mutual hatred of the soldiers, from the equality in numbers, and
the long experience each had in the other’s manner of fighting. The
battle, often on the point of being lost, was as often retrieved by
the personal exertion of the Moorish officers, upon whom the loss
principally fell. Sidi Hamet, the king’s son, the chiefs of Arar,
Nagal, Telga, Adega, Hargai, Gadai, and Kumo, were slain, with
several other principal men, who had either revolted from the king of
Abyssinia, or whom friendship to the king of Adel had brought from the
opposite coast of Arabia.

The king was still advancing with diligence, when he was overtaken
by an express, informing him that his queen Romana was delivered of
another prince, christened by the name of Anquo Israel. Upon which
good tidings he halted at once to rest and feast his army; and, in
the middle of the festivity, an express from Adber Yasous brought him
news of the complete victory over the Moors, and that there was now
no army in Adel of consequence enough to keep the field. Hereupon the
king detached a sufficient number of troops to reinforce Adber Yasous
in Adel, and continued himself recruiting his army, and making greater
preparations than before, that, during the first of the season, he
might utterly lay waste the whole Moorish country, or so disable them
that they might, for many years, be content to enjoy peace under the
condition of becoming his tributaries.

While planning these great enterprises, the king was seized with a pain
in his bowels, whether from poison or otherwise is not known, which
occasioned his death. Having, a few moments before he died, recollected
that his face was turned on a different side from the kingdom of Adel,
he ordered himself to be shifted in his bed, and placed so as to look
directly towards it, (a token how much his heart was set upon its
destruction) and in that posture he expired.

He was a prince of great bravery and conduct; very moderate in all his
pleasures; of great devotion; zealous for the established church, but
steady in resisting the monks and other clergy in all their attempts
towards persecution, innovation, and independency. Many stories have
been propagated of his inclination to the Catholic religion, and of his
aversion to having an Abuna from Egypt; and it is said, that, during
his whole reign, he obstinately persisted in refusing to suffer any
Abuna in his kingdom. But these are fables invented by the Portuguese
priests, who came into Abyssinia some time afterwards, and forged
anecdotes to serve their own purposes; for, unless we except the
story of the Venetian, Branca Leon, there is not a word said of any
connection Bæda Mariam ever had with the few Catholics that then were
in his country, and even that was a connection of his father’s. And
as to the other story, we find in history, that the Abuna had been in
the country ever since his father Zara Jacob’s time; and that, at his
desire, the Abuna, Imaranha Christos, came and received, in the field
of battle, large donations in gold, almost as often as the king gained
a victory. Bæda Mariam died at the age of forty, after reigning ten
years, which were spent in continual war; during the whole course of
which he was successful, and might (if he had lived) have very much
weakened the Moorish states, and prevented the terrible retaliation
that fell afterwards from that quarter upon his country.--It will be
proper now to look back into the transactions in Europe, which are
partly connected with the history of this kingdom.

The conquest of the north part of Africa followed the reduction of
Egypt, and the whole coast of Barbary was crowded with Mahometans, from
Alexandria to the western ocean, and from the Mediterranean to the edge
of the desert. Even the desert itself was filled with them; and trade,
security, and good faith, were now everywhere disseminated in regions,
a few years before the seat of murder and pillage.

Tarik and his Moors had invaded Spain; Musa followed him, and conquered
it. The history of Count Julian is in every one’s hand; unfortunate
in having had the provocation, still more so in having had the power
to revenge it, by sacrificing at once his sovereign, his country,
religion, and life, to the private injuries done to his daughter. As
often as I have read the history of this catastrophe, so often have I
regretted to see with how little ceremony this young lady hath been
treated by authors of all languages and nations. They call her _Caaba_,
with the same ease and indifference as they would have called her Anne,
or Margaret. This must be from mere ignorance. Caaba could not be
the name of the daughter of Count Julian before her seduction. Caaba
means _Harlot_, in the broadest way possible to express the term, and
very cruelly and improperly, it seems to be given her, even after her
misfortune; for she was a daughter of the first family in Spain, of
unexceptionable virtue. She was not seduced, but _forced_ by the king,
while in the palace, and under protection of the queen.

A great influx of trade followed the conquest; and the religion, that
contained little restraint and great indulgence, was every where
embraced by the vanquished, who long had been Christians in name only.
On the other side, the conquerors were now no longer that brutish set
of madmen, such as they were under the Khalifat of the fanatic Omar.
They were now men eminent for their rank and attainments in every
species of learning. This was a dangerous crisis for Christianity,
and nothing else was threatened than its total subversion. The whole
world, without the help of England, had not virtue enough to withstand
this torrent. That nation, the favourite weapon in the hand of Heaven
for chastising tyranny and extirpating false religion, now lent its
assistance, and the scale was quickly turned.

At that time Europe saw with surprise an inconsiderable number of
fishermen, very inconveniently placed at the farthest end of the
Adriatic Gulf, applying themselves with unwearied care and patience to
cultivate, gather together, and improve the remnants and gleanings of
the Indian trade by Alexandria, under all the cruelties and oppressions
of those ignorant and barbarous conquerors the Turks, whom no prospect
of gain, no change of place, no frequency of commerce, could ever
civilize or subject to the rules of justice. Venice became at once
the great market for spices and perfumes, and consequently the most
considerable maritime power that had appeared in Europe for ages.

Genoa followed, but sunk, after great efforts, under the power of her
rival; while Venice remained mistress of the sea, of a large dominion
upon the continent, and of the Indian spice trade, the origin and
support of all her greatness.

Rhodes, and the ships of the Military Order of St John of Jerusalem, to
whom that island belonged, greatly harrassed the maritime trade carried
on by the Moors in their own vessels from Alexandria, who were every
day more discouraged by the unexpected progress of these _once petty_
Christian states. Trade again began to be carried on by caravans in the
desert. Large companies of merchants from Arabia, passed in safety to
the western ocean, and were joined by other traders from the different
parts of Barbary while passing to the southward of them, and that with
such security and expedition, that the Moors began to set little value
on their manner of trading by sea, content now again with the labours
and conveniencies of their ancient, faithful friend, and servant, the
camel.

Ormus, a small island in the Persian Gulf, had, by its convenient
situation, become the market for the spice trade, after the
discouragements it had received in the Mediterranean. All Asia was
supplied from thence, and vessels, entering the Straits of Babelmandeb,
had renewed the old resort to the temple of Mecca. From hence all
Africa, too, was served by caravans, that never since have forsaken
that trade, but continue to this day, and cross the continent, in
various directions.

John I. king of Portugal, after many successful battles with the Moors,
had at last forced them to cross the sea, and return vanquished to
their native country. By this he had changed his former dishonourable
name of _bastard_ to the more noble and much more popular one of John
the _avenger_. This did not satisfy him. Assisted by some English
navigators, he passed over to Barbary, laid siege to Ceuta, and
speedily after made himself master of the city. This early connection
with the English arose by his having married Philipina of Lancaster,
sister of Henry IV. king of England, by whom he had five sons, all
of them heroes, and, at the taking of Ceuta, capable of commanding
armies. Henry, the youngest, scarce twenty years of age, was the first
that mounted the walls of that city in his father’s presence, and was
thereupon created Master of the Order of Christ, a new institution,
whose sole end and view was the extirpation of the Mahometan religion.

Although every thing promised fair to John in the war of Africa, yet
it early occurred to prince Henry, that a small kingdom like Portugal
never could promise to do any thing effectual against the enormous
power of the Mahometans, then in possession of extensive dominions in
the richest parts of the globe. The sudden rise of Venice was before
his eyes, and almost happened in his own time. By applying to trade
alone, she had acquired a power sufficient to cope with the stoutest of
her enemies. Portugal, small as it was, merited quite another degree of
respect; but poverty, ignorance, pride, and idleness prevailed among
the poor people; even agriculture itself was in a manner abandoned
since the expulsion of the Moors.

Prince Henry, from his early years, had been passionately addicted to
the study of what is generally known by the name of _mathematics_,
that is, geometry, astronomy, and consequently arithmetic. He was of a
liberal turn of mind, devoid of superstition, haughtiness, or passion;
the Arab and the Jew were admitted to him with great freedom, as the
only masters who were capable of instructing him in those sciences.
It was in vain to attempt to rival Venice in possession of the
Mediterranean trade: no other way remained but to open the commerce to
India by the Atlantic Ocean, by sailing round the point of Africa to
the market of spices in India. Full of this thought, he retired to a
country palace, and there dedicated the whole of his time to deliberate
inquiry. The ignorance and prejudices of the age were altogether
against him. The only geography then known was that of the poets. It
was the opinion of the Portuguese, that the regions within the tropics
were totally uninhabited, scorched by eternal sun-beams, while boiling
oceans wasted these burning coasts; and, therefore, they concluded,
that every attempt to explore them was little better than downright
madness, and a braving, or tempting, of Providence.

But, on the other hand, he found great materials to comfort him, and
to make him persist in his resolution. For Greek history, to which he
then had access, had recorded two instances, which shewed that the
voyage was not only possible, but that it had been actually performed,
first by the Phœnicians, under Necho king of Egypt, then by Eudoxus,
during the time of Ptolemy Lathyrus, who, after doubling the southern
Cape of Africa, arrived in safety at Cadiz. Hanno, too, had sailed from
Carthage through the Straits, and reached to 25° of north latitude
in the Atlantic Ocean. In more modern times, even in the preceding
century, Macham, an Englishman, returning from a voyage on the west
coast of Africa, was shipwrecked on the island of Madeira, together
with a woman whom he tenderly loved. After her death he became weary
of solitude; and having constructed a bark, or canoe, with which he
paddled over to the opposite coast, he was taken by the natives, and
presented to the Caliph as a curiosity. And the Normans of Dieppe had,
as a company, traded in 1364, not fourscore years from prince Henry’s
time, as far as Sierra de Leona, only 7° from the Line.

The prince’s humanity to his Moorish prisoners had likewise been
rewarded by substantial information; they reported that some of their
countrymen of the kingdom of Sus had advanced far into the desert,
carrying their water and provisions along with them on camels; that,
after many days travel, they came to mines of salt, and, having loaded
their cargoes, they proceeded till they came within the limits of the
rains; there they found large and populous towns, inhabited by a people
totally black and woolly-headed, who reported that there were many
countries even beyond them, occupied by numerous and warlike tribes.
To complete all, Don Pedro, Henry’s brother, returning from Venice,
brought along with him from that city a map, on which the whole coast
of the Atlantic Ocean was distinctly traced, and the southern extremity
of Africa was represented to be a cape surrounded with the sea, which
joined with the Indian Ocean.

No sooner was the prince thus satisfied of the possibility of a passage
to India round Africa, than he set about constructing the necessary
instruments for navigation. He corrected the solar tables of the Arabs,
and made some alterations in the astrolabe: For, strange to tell!
the quadrant was not then known in Portugal, though, a hundred years
before, Ulughbeg had measured the sun’s height at Samarcand in Persia,
with a quadrant of about 400 feet radius, the largest ever constructed,
if, indeed, the size of this be not exaggerated.

Henry, who, by his liberality and affability, had drawn together the
most learned mathematicians and ablest pilots of the age, now proposed
to reduce his speculations to practice. Many ships had sailed in the
course of his disquisitions, and ten years had now elapsed before
the prince, after all his encouragement, could induce the captains
to proceed farther than Cape Non, or, thirty leagues further, to
Cape Bojador. To this their courage held good; after which, the fear
of fiery oceans reviving in their minds, they returned exceedingly
satisfied with their own perseverance and abilities. Henry, though
greatly hurt at this behaviour, dissembled the low opinion which
he had formed of both. He contented himself with proposing to them
different reasons and rewards; and urged them to repeat their voyages,
which, however, constantly ended in the same disappointment. And
it is probable a much longer time might have been spent in these
miscarriages, had not accident, or rather providence, stept in to his
assistance.

John Gonsalez, and Tristan Vaz, two gentlemen of his bed-chamber,
seeing the impression this behaviour had made on the prince, and having
obtained a small ship from him, resolved to double Cape Bojador, and
discover the coast beyond it. Whether the fiery oceans might not have
presented themselves to these gentlemen, I know not; but a violent
storm forced them to sea. After being tossed about in perpetual fear
of shipwreck for several days, they at last landed on a small island,
which they called Port Santo. These two navigators possessed the true
spirit of discovery. Far from giving themselves up for lost in a new
world, or content with what they had already done, they set about
making the most diligent observation of every thing remarkable in this
small spot. The island itself was barren; but, examining the horizon
all around, they observed a black fixed spot there, which never either
changed its place or dimensions. Satisfied, therefore, that this
was land, they returned to the Infant with the news of this double
discovery.

Three vessels were speedily equipped by the prince; two of them given
to Vaz and Arco, and the third to Bartholomew Perestrello, gentleman
of the bed-chamber to Don John his brother. These adventurers were
far from disappointing his expectations; they arrived at Port Santo,
and proceeded to the fixed spot, which they found to be the island of
Madeira, wholly covered with wood; an island that has ever since been
of the greatest use to the trade of both Indies, and which has remained
to the crown of Portugal, after the greatest part of their other
conquests in the east are lost. John I. was now dead, and Edward had
succeeded him. The infant Henry, however, still continued the pursuit
of his discoveries with the greatest ardour.

Giles D’Anez, stimulated by the success of the last adventures, put
to sea with a resolution to double Cape Bojador close in shore, so as
to make his voyage a foundation for pushing farther the discovery;
and, being lucky in good weather, he fairly doubled the Cape; and,
continuing some leagues farther into the bay to the south of it, he
returned with the same good fortune to Portugal, after having found
the ocean equally as navigable on the other side as on this; and that
there was no foundation for those monstrous appearances or difficulties
mariners till now had expected to find there.

The successful expedition round Cape Bojador being soon spread abroad
through Europe, excited a spirit of adventure in all foreigners;
the most capable of whom resorted immediately to prince Henry, from
their different countries, which further increased the spirit of the
Portuguese, already raised to a very great height. But there still
was a party of men, who, not susceptible of great actions themselves,
dedicated their time with some success to criticising the enterprises
of others. These blamed prince Henry, because, when Portugal was
exhausted both of men and money by a necessary war in Africa, he
should have chosen that very time to launch out into expences and vain
discoveries of countries, in an immense ocean, which must be useless,
because incapable of cultivation. And though they did not advance,
as formerly, that the ocean was boiling among burning sands, they
still thought themselves authorised to assert, that these countries
must, from their situation under the sun, be so hot as to turn all
the discoverers black, and also to destroy all vegetation. Futile as
these reasons were, at another time they would have been sufficient to
have blasted all the designs of prince Henry, had they made half the
impression upon the king that they did upon the minds of the people.
Portugal was then only _growing_ to the pitch of heroism to which it
soon after arrived, their spirit being continually fostered by a long
succession of wise, brave, and well-informed princes.

Edward, the reigning prince, disdained to give any answer to such
objections, otherwise than by doubling his respect and attention for
his uncle Henry. To encourage him still further, he conferred upon
him for life the sovereignty of Madeira, Port Santo, and all the
discoveries he should make on the coast of Africa; and the spiritual
jurisdiction of the island of Madeira, upon his new Order of Christ,
for ever.

These voyages of discovery were constantly persevered in. Nugno Tristan
doubled Cape Blanco, and came to a small river, which, from their
finding gold in the hands of the natives, was afterwards called _Rio
del Oro_; and here a fort was afterwards built by the Portuguese,
called _Arguim_. I would not, however, have it supposed, that gold is
the produce of any place in the latitude of Cape Blanco. It was brought
here from the black nations, far to the southward, to purchase salt
from the mines which are in this desert near the Cape. The sight of
gold, better than any argument, served to calm the fears, and overcome
the scruples, of those who hitherto had been adversaries to these
discoveries.

In the year 1445, Denis Fernandes first discovered the great river
Senega, the northern banks of which are inhabited by Asenagi Moors,
whose colour is tawny, while the southern, or opposite banks, belong
to the Jaloffes, or Negro nation, the chief market for the gum-arabic.
Passing this river he discovered Cape Verde; and, to his inexpressible
satisfaction, though now in the midst of the torrid zone, he found
the country abounded with large rivers, and with the most luxuriant
verdure. He found a civil war in the nation of Jaloffes. Bemoy, a
prince of that nation, had, in a minority, intruded himself into
the throne of his brothers, (to whom he was but half blood), by the
address of his mother. The eldest of the three brothers preserved the
shadow of government, and seemed to favour the usurpation. Bemoy had
improved that interval by cultivating the Portuguese friendship to the
uttermost. He promised every thing; a place to build their city on the
continent, which the king very much desired; and to be a convert to
Christianity, the only thing the king wished still more. His eldest
brother dying, the king was briskly pressed by the two younger, and
steadily supported by the Portuguese, from whom he had borrowed large
sums; but still appearing to trifle with the day of his conversion, and
the day of his payment, the king ordered the Portuguese to withdraw
from his country, and leave him to his fortune. The loss of a battle
with his brothers soon reduced him to the necessity of flying across
the deserts to Arguim, and thence to Portugal, with a number of his
followers. He was received by the king of Portugal with all the honours
due to a sovereign prince, and baptised at Lisbon, the king and queen
being his sponsors.

Great festivals and illuminations were made at this acquisition to
Christianity; and Bemoy appeared at those festivals as the greatest
ornament of them, performing feats of horsemanship never before
practised in Portugal. The modesty and propriety of his conversation
and behaviour in private, and the great dignity and eloquence which he
displayed in public, began to give the Portuguese a very different idea
of his clan from that which they had formerly entertained.

In the mean time the king went rapidly on with the preparations
that were to establish Bemoy in his kingdom; and the festivals
were no sooner terminated, than Bemoy found a large army and fleet
ready to sail with him, the command of which, unhappily for him
and the expedition, was given to Tristan d’Acugna, a soldier of
great experience and courage, but proud, passionate, and cruel; the
disagreeable name of Bisagudo[20] had already been fixed upon him by
his countrymen.

The fleet performed the voyage, and the troops landed happily.
They were, by their number and valour, far from any apprehension
of opposition. The general began immediately to lay the foundation
of a fort, without having sufficiently attended to its unhealthy
situation. The spot which was chosen being low and marshy, fevers began
early to make havock among his men, and the work of course went on
proportionably slower. The murmurs of the army against his obstinacy
in adhering to the choice of this place, and his fear that he himself
should be left alone governor of it, made D’Acugna desperate; when one
day, taking his pleasure on board a ship, and having had some words
with Bemoy, he stabbed him with his dagger to the heart, so that he
fell dead without uttering a word. The fort was abandoned, and the army
returned to Portugal, after having cost little less than all prince
Henry’s discoveries together had done.

But Heaven rewarded the wisdom of the king by a discovery, the
consequences of which more than overpaid him, in his mind, for his
loss. Prince Henry’s principal view was to discover the way to India
by the southern Cape of Africa; but this as yet was not known to be
possible. In order to remedy a disappointment, if any such happened
in this sea-voyage, another was attempted by land. We have seen that
the common track for the Indian trade was from the east to the west
sea, through the desert, the whole breadth of Africa. Prince Henry
had projected a route parallel to this to the southward, through a
Christian country: For it had been long reported by the Christians
from Jerusalem, that a number of monks resorted thither, subjects of
a Christian prince in the very heart of Africa, whose dominions were
said to reach from the east to the west sea. Several of these monks had
been met at Alexandria, whose patriarch had the sole right to send a
metropolitan into that country. These facts, though often known, had
been as often forgot by the western Christians. Marco Paulo[21], a
Venetian traveller, had much confused the story, by saying he had met,
in his travels through Tartary, with this prince, who they all agreed
was a priest, and was called Joannes Presbyter Prete Janni, or Prester
John.

The king of Portugal, therefore, chose Peter Covillan and Alphonso
de Paiva for his ambassadors. Covillan was a man qualified for the
undertaking. He had several times been employed by the late king in
very delicate affairs, out of which he extricated himself with great
credit by his address and secrecy. He was, besides this, in the
vigour of his age, bold, active, and perfectly master of all sorts of
arms; modest and chearful in conversation, and, what crowned all, had
happily a great readiness in acquiring languages, which enabled him to
explain himself wherever he went, without an interpreter; an advantage
to which, above all others, we are to ascribe the success of such a
journey.

It was at the court of Bemoy that the first certain account of the
existence of this Christian prince was procured. This people, on the
west coast of Africa, reported, that, inland to the eastward, were many
powerful nations and cities, governed by princes totally independent
of each other; that the eastermost of these princes was called prince
of the Mosaical people, who were neither Pagans nor Idolaters, but
professed a religion compounded of the Christian and Jewish.

It seems plain that this intelligence must have been brought by the
caravans; or, indeed, the case may have been that the language of the
Negroes had, of old, been a dialect of Abyssinian. The black Ethiopians
above Thebes are reported to have bestowed much care upon letters; and
they certainly reformed the hieroglyphics, and probably invented the
Syllabic alphabet, which we know is used in Abyssinia to this day,
and which was probably the first among the nations. Be that as it
will, the various names which the Senega went by were all Abyssinian
words. Senega comes from Asenagi, which is Abyssinian, and signifies
_carriers_, or _caravans_; Dengui, _a stone_, or _rock_; Angueah, a
tree of that name; Anzo, _a crocodile_; and, at the same time, all
these are names of Abyssinian rivers.

It was at Benin, another Negro country, that the king again received
a confirmation of the existence of a Christian prince, who was said
to inhabit the heart of Africa to the south-east of this state. The
people of Benin reported him to be a prince exceedingly powerful; that
his name was Ogané, and his kingdom about 250 leagues to the eastward.
They added, that the kings of Benin received from him a brass cross and
a staff as their investiture. It should seem that this Ogané is but a
corruption of Jan, or Janhoi, which title the eastern Christians had
given to the king of Abyssinia. But it is very difficult to account for
the knowledge of Abyssinia in the kingdom of Benin, not only on account
of the distance, but likewise, because several of the most savage
nations of the world, the Galla and Shangalla, occupy the intervening
space.

The court of Abyssinia, as we shall see afterwards, did, indeed,
then reside in Shoa, the south-east extremity of the kingdom, and,
by its power and influence, probably might have pushed its dominion
through these barbarians, down to the neighbourhood of Benin on the
western ocean. But all this I must confess to be a simple conjecture
of mine, of which, in the country itself, I never found the smallest
confirmation.

Amha Yasous (prince of Shoa) being at court, on a visit to the king
at Gondar, in the years 1770 and 1771, and the strictest friendship
subsisting between us, every endeavour possible was used on my part to
examine this affair to the bottom. A number of letters were written,
and messengers sent; and, at this prince’s desire, his father directed,
that all the records of government should be consulted to satisfy me.
But never any thing occurred which gave room to imagine the prince of
Shoa had ever been sovereign of Benin, nor was the western ocean, or
that state, known to them in my time. Yet the country alluded to could
be no other than Abyssinia; and, indeed, the crooked staff, as well as
the cross, corroborate this opinion, unless the whole was an invention
of the Negroes, to flatter the king of Portugal.

That prince was resolved no longer to delay the discovery of the
markets of the spice-trade in India, and the passage over land,
through Abyssinia, to the eastern ocean. He, therefore, as has been
before said, dispatched Covillan and de Paiva to Alexandria, with the
necessary letters and credit. They had likewise a map, or chart, given
them, made under the direction of prince Henry, which they were to
correct, or to confirm, according as it needed. They were to enquire
what were the principal markets for the spice, and particularly the
pepper-trade in India; and what were the different channels by which
this was conveyed to Europe; whence came the gold and silver, the
medium of this trade; and, above all, they were to inform themselves
distinctly, whether it was possible to arrive in India by sailing round
the southern promontory of Africa.

From Alexandria these two travellers proceeded to Cairo, thence to
Suez, the port on the bottom of the Red Sea, where joining a caravan
of western Moors, they continued their route to Aden, a rich trading
town, without the Straits of Babelmandeb. Here they separated:
Covillan set sail for India, De Paiva for Suakem, a small trading
town and island in Barbaria, or Barabra of the ancients. What other
circumstances occurred we know not, only that De Paiva, attempting his
journey this way, lost his life, and was never more heard of.

Covillan, more fortunate, passed over to Calicut and Goa in India;
then crossed the Indian Ocean to Sofala, to inspect the mines; then
he returned to Aden, and so to Cairo, where he expected to meet his
companion De Paiva; but here he heard of his death. However, he was
there met by two Jews with letters from the king of Abyssinia, the one
called Abraham, the other Joseph. Abraham he sent back with letters,
but took Joseph along with him again to Aden, and thence they both
proceeded to Ormus in the Persian Gulf. Here they separated, and the
Jew returned home by the caravans that pass along the desert to Aleppo.
Covillan, now solely intent upon the discovery of Abyssinia, returned
to Aden, and, crossing the Straits of Babelmandeb, landed in the
dominions of that prince, whose name was Alexander, and whom he found
at the head of his army, levying contributions upon his rebellious
subjects. Alexander received him kindly, but rather from motives of
curiosity than from any expectation of advantage which would result
from his embassy. He took Covillan along with him to Shoa, where the
court then resided.

Covillan returned no more to Europe. A cruel policy of Abyssinia
makes this a favour constantly denied to strangers. He married, and
obtained large possessions; continued greatly in the favour of several
succeeding princes, and was preferred to the principal offices, in
which, there is no doubt, he appeared with all the advantage a polished
and instructed mind has over an ignorant and barbarous one. Frequent
dispatches from him came to the king of Portugal, who, on his part,
spared no expence to keep open the correspondence. In his journal,
Covillan described the several ports in India which he had seen; the
temper and disposition of the princes; the situation and riches of the
mines of Sofala: He reported that the country was very populous, full
of cities both powerful and rich; and he exhorted the king to pursue,
with unremitting vigour, the passage round Africa, which he declared
to be attended with very little danger; and that the Cape itself was
well known in India. He accompanied this description with a chart, or
map, which he had received from the hands of a Moor in India, where the
Cape, and cities all around the coast, were exactly represented.

Upon this intelligence the king fitted out three ships under
Bartholomew Dias, who had orders to inquire after the king of Abyssinia
on the western ocean. Dias passed on to lat. 24½ deg. south, and there
set up the arms of the king of Portugal in token of possession. He then
sailed for the harbour of the Herdsmen, so called from the multitude
of cows seen on land; and, as it should seem, not knowing whither he
was going, came to a river which he called _Del Infante_, from the
captain’s name that first discovered it, having, without dreaming of
it, passed that formidable Cape, the object so much desired by the
Portuguese. Here he was tossed for many days by violent storms as he
came near land, being more and more in the course of variable winds,
but, obstinately persisting to discover the coast, he at last came
within sight of the Cape, which he called the _Cape of Tempests_, from
the rough treatment his vessel had met in her passage round it.

The great end was now obtained. Dias and his companions had really
suffered much, and, upon their return, they did not fail to do ample
justice to their own bravery and perseverance; in doing this, they had
conjured up so many storms and dreadful sights, that, all the remaining
life of king John, there was no more talk but of this Cape: Only the
king, to hinder a bad omen, instead of the Cape of Tempests, ordered it
to be called the Cape of Good Hope.

Although the discovery now was made, there were not wanting a
considerable number of people of the greatest consequence who were for
abandoning it altogether; one of their reasons was curious, and what,
if their behaviour afterwards had not been beyond all instance heroic,
would have led us to imagine their spirit of religion and conquest
had both cooled since the days of prince Henry. They were afraid,
lest, after having discovered a passage to India, the depriving the
Moorish states of their revenues from the spice-trade, should unite
these powers to their destruction. Now, to destroy their revenues
effectually, and thereby ruin their power, was the very motive which
set prince Henry upon the discovery, as worthy the Grand Master of the
Order of Christ; an order founded in the blood of unbelievers, and
devoted particularly to the extirpation of the Mahometan religion.

Don Emmanuel, then king, having no such apprehensions, resolved to
abide the consequences of a measure the most arduous ever undertaken
by any nation, and which, though it had cost a great deal of time and
expence, had yet succeeded beyond their utmost expectations. It was not
till after long deliberation that he fixed upon Vasques de Gama, a man
of the first distinction, remarkable for courage and great presence of
mind. Before his departure, the king put into his hands the journal
of Peter Covillan, with his chart, and letters of credit to all the
princes in India of whom he had obtained any knowledge.

The behaviour of Vasques de Gama, at parting, was far from being
characteristic of the soldier or great man: his processions and
tapers favoured much more of the ostentatious devotion of a bigotted
little-minded priest, and was much more calculated to depress the
spirits of his soldiers, than to encourage them to the service they
were then about to do for their country. It served only to revive in
their minds the hardships that Dias had met off the Terrible Cape,
and persuade them there was in their expedition much more danger than
glory. I would not be understood as meaning to condemn all acts of
devotion before military expeditions, but would have them always short,
ordinary, and uniform. Every thing further inspires in weak minds a
sense of danger, and makes them despond upon any serious appearance of
difficulty.

July 4th, 1497, Vasques, with his small fleet, sailed from Lisbon; and,
as the art of navigation was considerably improved, he stood out to sea
till he made the Canary Islands, and then those of Cape de Verde, where
he anchored, took in water and other refreshments. After which he was
four months struggling with contrary winds and blowing weather, and at
last obliged, through perfect fatigue, to run into a large bay called
_St Helena_[22], in lat. 32° 32´ south. The inhabitants of this bay
were black, of low stature, and their language not understood, though
it afterwards was found to be the same with that of the Cape. They were
cloathed with skins of antelopes, which abounded in the country, since
known to be that of the Hottentots; their arms were the horns and bones
of beasts and fishes, for they had no knowledge of iron.

The Portuguese were unacquainted with the trade-winds in those southern
latitudes; and Vasques had departed for India, in a most unfavourable
season of the year. The 16th of November they sailed for the Cape with
a south-west wind; but that very day, the weather changing, a violent
storm came on, which continued increasing; so, although on the 18th
they discovered their long-desired Cape, they did not dare or attempt
to pass it. Then it was seen how much stronger the impressions were
that Dias had left imprinted in their minds, than those of duty,
obedience, and resignation, which they had so pompously vowed at the
chapel, or hermitage. All the crew mutinied, and refused to pass
farther; and it was not the common sailors only; the pilots and masters
were at their head. Vasques, satisfied in his mind that there was
nothing extraordinary in the danger, persevered to pass the Cape in
spite of all difficulties; and the officers, animated with the same
ardour, seized the most mutinous of their masters and pilots, and
confined them close below in heavy irons.

Vasques himself, taking hold of the rudder, continued to steer the ship
with his own hand, and stood out to sea, to the astonishment of the
bravest seaman on board. The storm lasted two days, without having in
the least shaken the resolution of the admiral, who, on the 20th of
November, saw his constancy rewarded by doubling that Cape, which he
did, as it were, in triumph, sounding his trumpets, beating his drums,
and permitting to his people all sorts of pastimes which might banish
from their minds former apprehensions, and induce them to agree with
him, that the point had very aptly been called the Cape of Good Hope.

On the 25th they anchored in a creek called _Angra de Saint Blaze_.
Soon after their arrival there appeared a number of the inhabitants on
the mountains, and on the shore. The general, fearing some surprise,
landed his men armed. But, first, he ordered small brass bells, and
other trinkets, to be thrown out of the boats on shore, which the
blacks greedily took up, and ventured so near as to take one of them
out of the general’s own hand. Upon his landing, he was welcomed with
the sound of flutes and singing. Vasques, on his part, ordered his
trumpets to sound, and his men to dance round them.

ALL along from St Blaze, for more than sixty leagues, they found the
coast remarkably pleasant, full of high and fair trees. On Christmas
day they made land, and entered a river which they called _the river of
the kings_; and all the distance between this and St Blaze they named
_Terra de Natal_. The weather being mild, they took to their boats
to row along the shore, on which were observed both men and women of
a large stature, but who seemed to be of quiet and civil behaviour.
The general ordered Martin Alonzo, who spoke several languages of
the Negroes, to land; and he was so well received by the chief, or
king, that the admiral sent him several trifles, with which he was
wonderfully pleased, and offered, in return, any thing he wanted of the
produce of his country.

On the 15th of January, in the year 1498, having taken in plenty of
water, which the Negroes, of their own accord, helped them to put on
board, they left this civil nation, steering past a length of coast
terminated by a Cape called the _Cape of Currents_. There the coast of
Natal ends, and that of Sofala begins, to the northward of the Cape. At
this place, Gama from the south joined Covillan’s track from the north,
and these two Portuguese had completely made the circuit of Africa.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




ISCANDER, OR ALEXANDER.

From 1478 to 1495.

_Iscander declares War with Adel--Good Conduct of the King--Betrayed
and murdered by Za Saluce._


As soon as the king Bæda Mariam was dead, the history of Abyssinia
informs us, that a tumultuous meeting of the nobles brought from the
mountain of Geshen the queen Romana, with her son Iscander, who upon
his arrival was crowned without any opposition.

It is to be observed in the Abyssinian annals, that very frequent
minorities happen. A queen-mother, or regent, with two or three of the
greatest interest at court, are, during the minority, in possession of
the king’s person, and govern in his name. The transactions of this
minority, too, are as carefully inserted in the annals of the kingdom
as any other part of the subsequent government, but as the whole of
these minorities are but one continued chain of quarrels, plots, and
treachery, as soon as the king comes of age, the greatest part of this
reign of his ministers is cancelled, as being the acts of subjects,
and not worthy to be inserted in their histories; which they entitle
_Kebra Za Negust_, the greatness or atchievements of their kings.
This, however political in itself, is a great disadvantage to history,
by concealing from posterity the first cause of the most important
transactions.

For several years after Iscander ascended the throne, the queen his
mother, together with the Acab Saat, Tesfo Georgis, and Betwudet Amdu,
governed the kingdom despotically under the name of the young king.
Accordingly, after some years sufferance, a conspiracy was formed,
at the head of which were two men of great power, Abba Amdu and Abba
Hasabo, but the conspirators proving unsuccessful, some of them were
imprisoned, some put to death, and others banished to unwholesome
places, there to perish with hunger and fevers.

The king from his early age had shewn a passionate desire for a war
with Adel, and that prince, whose country had been so often desolated
by the Abyssinian armies, omitted no opportunity of creating an
interest at that court, that should keep things in a quiet state. In
this, however, he was much interrupted at present by a neighbouring
chief of Arar, named Maffudi. This man, exceedingly brave, capable
of enduring the greatest hardships, and a very great bigot to the
Mahometan religion, had made a vow, that, every Lent, he would spend
the whole forty days in some part of the Abyssinian kingdom; and
to this purpose he had raised, at his own expence, a small body of
veteran troops, whom he inspired with the same spirit and resolution.
Sometimes he fell on one part of the frontier, sometimes upon another;
slaying, without mercy, all that made resistance, and driving off
whole villages of men, women, and children, whom he sent into Arabia,
or India, to be sold as slaves.

It was a matter of great difficulty for the king of Adel to persuade
the Abyssinians that Maffudi acted without his instigation. The young
king was one who could not distinguish Adel from Arar, or Mahomet’s
army from Maffudi’s. He bore with very great impatience the excesses
every year committed by the latter; but he was over-ruled by his
nobility at home, and his thoughts turned as much as possible to
hunting, to which he willingly gave himself up; and, tho’ but fifteen
years of age, was the person, in all Abyssinia, most dexterous at
managing his arms. At last, being arrived at the age of seventeen,
and returning from having observed a very successful expedition made
by Maffudi against his territories, he ordered Za Saluce, his first
minister, commander in chief, and governor of Amhara, to raise the
whole forces to the southward, while he himself collected the nobility
in Angot and Tigré. With those, as soon as the rainy season was over,
he descended into the kingdom of Adel.

The king of Adel had been forced into this war, yet, like a wise
prince, he was not unprepared for it. He had advanced directly towards
the king, but had not passed his frontiers. Some inhabitants of a
village called _Arno_, all Mahometans, but tributary to the king of
Abyssinia, had murdered the governor the king had set over them.
Iscander marched directly to destroy it, which he had no sooner
accomplished, than the Moorish army presented itself. The battle was
maintained obstinately on both sides, till the troops under Za Saluce
withdrew in the heat of the engagement, leaving the king in the midst
of his enemies. This treason, however, seemed to have inspired the
small army that remained with new courage, so that the day was as yet
dubious, when Iscander, being engaged in a narrow pass, and seeing
himself close pressed by a Moor who bore in his hand the green standard
of Mahomet, turned suddenly upon him, and slew him with a javelin; and,
having wrested the colours from him as he was falling, he, with the
point of the spear that bore the ensign, struck the king of Adel’s son
dead to the ground, which immediately caused the Moors to retreat.

The young prince was too prudent to follow this victory in the state
the army then was; for that of Adel, though it had retreated, did not
disperse. Za Saluce was returning by long marches to Amhara, exciting
all those in his way to revolt; and it was high time, therefore, for
the king to follow him. But, unequal as he was in strength to the
Moors, he could not reconcile it with his own honour to leave their
army masters of the field. He, therefore, first consulted the principal
officers of his troops, then harangued his men, which, the historian
says, he did in the most pathetic and masterly manner; so that, with
one voice, they desired instantly to be led to the Moors. The king
is said to have ranged his little army in a manner that astonished
the oldest officers. He then sent a defiance to the Moors, by several
prisoners whom he released. They, however, more desirous to keep him
from ravaging the country than to fight another battle, continued
quiet in their tents; and the king, after remaining on the field till
near noon, drew off his troops in the presence of his enemy, making a
retreat which would not have been unworthy of the hero whose name he
bore.

The king, in his return to Shoa, left his troops, which was the
northern army, in the northern provinces, as he passed; so that he
came to Shoa with a very small retinue, hearing that Za Saluce had
gone to Amhara. This traitor, however, had left his creatures behind
him, after instructing them what they were to do. Accordingly, the
second day after Iscander’s arrival in Tegulat, the capital of Shoa,
they set upon him, during the night, in a small house in Aylo Meidan,
and murdered him while he was sleeping. They concealed his body for
some days in a mill, but Taka Christos, and some others of the king’s
friends, took up the corpse and exposed it to the people, who, with one
accord, proclaimed Andreas, son of Iscander, king; and Za Saluce and
his adherents, traitors.

In the mean time, Za Saluce, far from finding the encouragement he
expected in Amhara, was, upon his first appearance, set upon by the
nobility of that province; and, being deserted by his troops, he was
taken prisoner; his eyes were put out, and, being mounted on an ass, he
was carried amidst the curses of the people through the provinces of
Amhara and Shoa.

Iscander was succeeded by his son Andreas, or Amda Sion, an infant, who
reigned seven months only.

A wonderful confusion seems to be introduced at this time into history,
by the Portuguese writers. Iscander is said to die in the 1490. He
began, as they say, to reign in 1475, and this is confirmed by Ludolf;
and, on all hands, it is allowed he reigned 17 years, which would
have brought the last year of his reign to 1492. It seems also to be
agreed by the generality of them, that Covillan saw and conversed with
this prince, Iscander, some time before his death: this he very well
might have done, if that prince lived to the 1492, and Peter Covillan
came into Abyssinia in 1490, as Galvan says in his father’s memoirs.
But then Tellez informs us expressly, that Iscander was dead 6 months
before the arrival of Peter Covillan in that country: If Peter Covillan
arrived 6 months after the death of Iscander, it must have been in the
end of his son’s reign, Amda Sion, who was an infant, and reigned only
7 months.

Alvarez omits this king, Amda Sion, altogether, and so does Tellez; and
there is a heap of mistakes here that shew these Portuguese historians
paid very little attention to the chronology of these reigns. They
call Alexander the father of Naod, when he was really but his brother;
and Helena, they say, was David’s mother, when, in fact, she was his
grandmother, or rather his grandfather’s wife; for Helena, who was
Iteghé in the time of David the III. had never either son or daughter.
So that if I differ, as in fact I do, 4 years, or thereabout, in this
account, I do not think in those remote times, when the language and
manner of accounting was so little known to these strangers, that I,
therefore, should reject my own account and servilely adopt theirs,
and the more so, because, as we shall see in its proper place, by the
examination and comparison made by help of an eclipse of the sun in
the 13th year of Claudius’ reign in the 1553, and counting from that
downwards to my arrival in Abyssinia, and backwards to Iscander, that
that prince must have begun his reign in 1478, and reigning 17 years,
did not die till the year 1495, and therefore must have seen Peter
Covillan, and conversed with him, if he had arrived in Abyssinia so
early as the 1490.

[Illustration]




NAOD.

From 1495 to 1508.

_Wise Conduct of the King--Prepares far a War with the Moors--Concludes
an honourable Peace with Adel._


After the unfortunate death of the young king Alexander, the people
in general, wearied of minorities, unanimously chose Naod for their
king. He was Alexander’s younger brother, the difference of ages
being but one year, though he was not by the same mother, but by the
king’s second wife Calliope. He was born at a town called Gabargué,
the day the royal army was cut off in his father’s time, when both the
Betwudets perished. From this circumstance, the Empress Helena and her
party had used some underhand means to set him aside as unfortunate,
and in his place to put Anquo Israel, Bæda Mariam’s youngest son, that
they might govern him and the kingdom during his non-age. But Taka
Christos, their man of confidence, being, on his first declaration of
such intentions, cut off by the army in Dawaro, Naod was immediately
proclaimed, and brought from the mountain of Geshen.

Although Naod was in the prime of life, and vigorous both in body and
mind, yet such were the circumstances of the kingdom at his accession,
that it seemed a task too arduous for any one man. The continual
intrigues of the empress, the quantity of Mahometan gold which was
circulating on every occasion throughout the court, the little success
the army had in Adel, as also the treachery of Za Saluce, and the
untimely end of the young prince, who seemed to promise a remedy to the
misfortunes, had so disunited the principal people in the government,
that there did not seem a sufficient number of men worthy of trust
to assist the king with their councils, or fill, with any degree of
dignity, the places that were vacant.

Naod was no sooner seated on the throne than he published a very
general and comprehensive amnesty. By proclamation he declared, “That
any person who should upbraid another with being a party in the
misfortunes of past times, or say that he had been privy to this or to
that conspiracy, or had been a favourite of the empress, or a partizan
of Za Saluce, or had received bribes from the Moors, should, without
delay, be put to death.” This proclamation had the very best effect, as
it quieted the mind of every guilty person when he saw the king, from
whom he feared an inquiry, cutting off all possible means by which it
could be procured against him. Andreas a monk, a man of quality, and of
very great consequence in that country, a relation of the king by his
mother, having affected to talk lightly of the proclamation, the king
sent for him, and ordered the tip of his tongue to be cut off in his
presence. This man, whose fault seems only to have been in his tongue,
and of whom a very great character is given, lived in the succeeding
reign to give the king a very distinguished proof of his attachment to
his family, and love of his country.

Naod having thus prudently quieted disturbances at home, turned his
thoughts to the war with Maffudi; for the king of Adel himself had
made his peace through mediation of the empress Helena; and this king,
more politic than Alexander his brother, was willing to dissemble with
the king of Adel, that he might fight his two adversaries singly: He,
therefore, prepared a smaller army than was usual for the king to head,
without suffering a Moor of any kind to serve in it.

It was known to a day when Maffudi was to enter upon his expeditions
against Abyssinia. For near thirty years he had begun to burn the
churches, and drive off the people and cattle on the first day of
Lent; and, as Lent advanced, he with his army penetrated farther up
the country. The Abyssinians are the strictest people in the world in
keeping fasts. They are so austere that they taste no sort of animal
food, nor butter, eggs, oil, or wine. They will not, though ever so
thirsty, drink a cup of water till six o’clock in the evening, and then
are contented, perhaps, with dry or sour leaven bread, the best of them
only making use of honey; by which means they become so weak as to be
unable to bear any fatigue. This was Maffudi’s reason for invading the
country in Lent, at which time scarce a Christian, through fasting, was
able to bear arms.

Naod, like a wise prince who had gained the confidence of his army,
would not carry with him any man who did not, for that time, live
in the same free and full manner he was used to do in festivals. He
himself set the example; and Andreas the monk, after taking upon
himself a vow of a whole year’s fasting for the success of the army,
declared to them, that there was more merit in saving one Christian
village from slavery, and turning Mahometan, than in fasting their
whole lives.

The king then marched against Maffudi; and having taken very strong
ground, as if afraid of his army’s weakness, the Moors, contrary to
advice of their leader, attacked the king’s camp in the most careless
and presumptuous manner. They had no sooner entered, however, by ways
left open on purpose for them, than they found the king’s army in
order to receive them, and were so rudely attacked, that most of those
who had penetrated into the camp were left dead upon the spot. The
king continued the pursuit with his troops, retook all the prisoners
and cattle which Maffudi was driving away, and advanced towards the
frontiers of Adel, where ambassadors met him, hoping, on the part of
the king, that his intention was not to violate the treaty of peace.

To this the king answered, That, so far from it, he would confirm the
peace with them, but with this condition, that they must deliver up to
him all the Abyssinians that were to be found in their country taken by
Maffudi in his last expedition, adding, that he would stay fifteen days
there to expect his answer. The king of Adel, desirous of peace, and
not a little terrified at the disaster of Maffudi, hitherto reckoned
invincible, gathered together all the slaves as soon as possible, and
returned them to the king.

Naod having now, by his courage and prudence, freed himself from fear
of a foreign war, returned home, and set himself like a wise prince to
the reforming of the abuses that prevailed everywhere among his people,
and to the cultivation of the arts of peace. He died a natural death,
after having reigned 13 years.

[Illustration]




DAVID III.

From 1508 to 1540.

    _David, an Infant, Succeeds--Queen sends Matthew Ambassador to
    Portugal--David takes the Field--Defeat of the Moors--Arrival
    of an Embassy from Portugal--Disastrous War with Adel._


The vigorous reign of Naod had at least suspended the fate of the whole
empire; and, had it not been that they still persisted in that ruinous
and dangerous measure of following minority with minority, by the
election of children to the throne, it is probable this kingdom would
have escaped the greatest part of those dismal calamities that fell
upon it in the sequel. But the Iteghé Helena, and the Abuna Marcos,
(now become her creature) had interest enough, notwithstanding the
apparent necessities of the times, to place David son of Naod upon
the throne, a child of eleven years old, that they might take upon
themselves the government of the kingdom; whereas Anquo Israel (third
son of Bæda Mariam) was of an age proper to govern, and whom they would
have preferred to Naod for the same reason, merely because he was then
a child.

Besides the desire of governing, another motive operated, which,
however good in itself, was very criminal from the present
circumstances. A peace with Adel was what the empress Helena constantly
desired; for she could not see with indifference the destruction of
her own country, far less contribute to it. She was herself by origin
a Moor, daughter of Mahomet, governor for the king in Dawaro; had been
suspected, so early as her husband’s time, of preferring the welfare of
her own country to that of the kingdom of Abyssinia.

This princess, perfectly informed of the interests of both nations,
seems, in her whole conduct, to have acted upon the most judicious and
sensible principles. She knew the country of Adel to be, by situation
and interest, perfectly commercial; that part of Africa, the opposite
Arabia, and the peninsula of the Indies, were but three partners
joined in one trade; they mutually consumed each other’s produce; they
mutually contributed to export the joint produce of the three countries
to distant parts of Europe, Asia, and Africa; which three continents
then constituted the whole known world. When Adel was at peace with
Abyssinia, then the latter became rich, from the gold, ivory, coffee,
cattle, hides, and all manner of provision, procured by the former
from every part of the mountainous tract above it. Trade flourished
and plenty followed it. The merchants carried every species of goods
to the most distant provinces in safety, equally to the advantage of
Abyssinia and Adel. These advantages, so sensibly felt, were maintained
by bribery, and a constant circulation of Mahometan gold in the court
of Abyssinia; the kingdom, however, thus prospered. A war with Adel, on
the contrary, had its origin in a violent desire of a barbarous people,
such as the Abyssinians were, to put themselves in possession of riches
which their neighbours had gained by trade and industry.

She saw that, even in this the worst of cases, nothing utterly
destructive could possibly happen to the Abyssinians; in their inroads
into that country, they plundered the markets and got, at the risk of
their lives, India stuffs of every kind, for which else they would have
paid money. On the other hand, the people of Adel, when conquerors,
acquired no stuffs, no manufactures, but the persons of the Abyssinians
themselves, whom they carried into slavery, and sold in Arabia, and
all parts of Asia, at immense profits. Next to gold they are the most
agreeable and valuable merchandise in every part of the east; and
these again, being chiefly the idle people who delighted in war, their
absence promoted the more desirable event of peace.

In this state we see that war was but another species of commerce
between the two countries, though peace was the most eligible state
for them both; and this the empress Helena had constantly endeavoured
to maintain, but could not succeed among a people fond of war, by any
other means, but by giving them a minor for their king, who was by the
law of the land under her direction, as the country was, during his
minority, under her regency.

Although this, the ordinary state of the empress’s politics, had
hitherto answered well between the kingdoms, when no other parties
were engaged, the introduction of a third power, and its influence,
totally changed that system. The Turks, an enemy not yet known in any
formidable line by the southern part of Africa, or Asia, now appeared
under a form that made all those southern states tremble.

Selim, emperor of Constantinople, had defeated Canso el Gauri, Soldan
of Egypt, and slain him in the field. After a second battle he had
taken Cairo, the capital of that country; and, under the specious
pretence of a violation of the law of nations, by Tomum Bey, the
successor, who was said to have put his ambassadors to death, he had
hanged that prince upon one of the principal gates of his own capital;
and, by this execution, had totally destroyed the succession of the
Mamalukes. Sinan Basha, the great general and minister of Selim, in a
very few months over-ran all the peninsula of Arabia, to the verge of
the Indian Ocean.

These people, trained to war, Mahomet had inspired with enthusiasm,
and led them to the conquest of the East. Trade and luxury had, after
that, disarmed and reduced them to much the same situation as, in a
former age, they had been found by Augustus Cæsar. Sinan Basha, with
a troop of veterans, had, by degrees extirpated the native princes of
the country; those that resisted, by force; and those that submitted
to him, by treachery; and in their place, in every principal town, he
had substituted Turkish officers of confidence, strongly supported by
troops of Janizaries, who knew no other government but martial law.

War had now changed its form entirely under these new conquerors.
Muskets, and large trains of artillery, were introduced against
javelins, lances, and arrows, the only arms then known in Arabia, and
in the opposite continent of Abyssinia. A large fleet, crowded with
soldiers, and filled with military stores, the very name of which, as
well as their destructive qualities, were till now unknown in these
southern regions, were employed by the Turks to extend their conquest
to India, where, though by the superior valour of the Portuguese
they were constantly disappointed in their principal object, they
nevertheless, in their passage outward and homeward, reinforced their
several posts in Arabia, from which they looked for assistance and
protection, had any enemy placed himself in their way, or a storm, or
other unexpected misfortune, overtaken them in their return.

These Janizaries lived upon the very bowels of commerce. They had,
indeed, for a shew of protecting it, established customhouses in their
various ports; but they soon made it appear, that the end proposed
by these was only to give them a more distinct knowledge who were
the subjects from whom they could levy the most enormous extortions.
Jidda, Zibid, and Mocha, the places of consequence nearest to Abyssinia
on the Arabian shore, Suakem, a sea-port town on the very barriers
of Abyssinia, in the immediate way of their caravan to Cairo, on the
African side, were each under the command of a Turkish basha, and
garrisoned by Turkish troops sent thither from Constantinople by the
emperors Selim and Soliman, his successors.

The peaceable Arabian merchants, full of that good faith which
successful commerce inspires, fled everywhere from the violence and
injustice of these Turkish tyrants, and landed in safety their riches
and persons on the opposite shore of the kingdom of Adel. The trade
from India, flying from the same enemy, took refuge in Adel among
its own correspondents, the Moorish merchants, during the violent
and impolitic tyranny that everywhere took place under this Turkish
oppression.

Zeyla is a small island, on the very coast of Adel, opposite to Arabia
Felix without the Straits of Babelmandeb, upon the entrance of the
Indian Ocean. The Turks of Arabia, though they were blind to the cause,
were sensible of the great influx of trade into the opposite kingdom.
They took possession, therefore, of Zeyla, where they established what
they called a Customhouse, and by means of that post, and gallies
cruising in the narrow Straits, they laid the Indian trade to Adel
under heavy contributions, that might, in some measure, indemnify them
for the great desertion their violence and injustice had occasioned in
Arabia.

This step threatened the very existence both of Adel and Abyssinia; and
considering the vigorous government of the one, and the weak politics
and prejudices of the other, it is more than probable the Turks would
have subdued both Adel and Abyssinia, had they not, in India their
chief object, met the Portuguese, strongly established, and governed
by a succession of kings who had not in any age their equals, and
seconded by officers and soldiers who, for discipline, courage, love to
their country, and affection to their sovereign were, perhaps, superior
to any troops, or any set of individuals, that, as far as we can judge
from history, have ever yet appeared in the world.

It was not now a time for a woman to reign, nor, which was the same
thing, to place a child upon the throne. The empress Helena saw this
distinctly; but her ambition made her prefer the love of reigning
to the visible necessities and welfare of her country. She knew the
progress and extent of the Portuguese power in India; and saw plainly
there was no prospect, but in their assistance, at once to save both
Abyssinia and Adel.

Peter Covillan, sent thither as ambassador by John king of Portugal,
had, for two reigns, been detained in Abyssinia, with a constant
refusal of leave to return. He was now become an object of curiosity
rather than use. However, except his liberty, he had wanted nothing.
The empress had married him nobly in the country; had given him large
appointments, both as to profit and dignity. She now began to be
sensible of the consequence of having with her a man of his abilities,
who could open to her the method of corresponding effectually both with
India and Portugal in their own language, to which, as well as to the
persons to whom her letters were to be addressed, she was then an utter
stranger.

She had about her court an Armenian merchant named Matthew, a person
of great trust and discretion, who had been long accustomed to go
to the several kingdoms of the East upon mercantile commissions for
the king and for his nobles. He had been at Cairo, Jerusalem, Ormus,
Ispahan, and in the East Indies on the coast of Malabar; both in places
conquered by the Portuguese, and in those that yet held out under
their native Pagan princes. He was one of those factors which, as I
have already said, are employed by the king and great men in Abyssinia
to sell or barter, in the places above mentioned, such part of their
revenue as are paid them in kind.

These men are chiefly Greeks, or Armenians, but the preference is
always given to the latter. Both nations pay caratch, or capitation,
to the Grand Signior, (whose subjects they are) and both have, in
consequence, passports, protections, and liberty to trade wherever they
please throughout the empire, without being liable to those insults and
extortions from the Turkish officers that other strangers are.

The Armenians, of all the people in the East, are those most remarkable
for their patience and sobriety. They are generally masters of most
of the eastern languages; are of strong, robust constitutions; of all
people, the most attentive to the beasts and merchandise they have in
charge; exceedingly faithful, and content with little. This Matthew,
queen Helena chose for her ambassador to Portugal, and joined a young
Abyssinian with him, who died in the voyage. He was charged with
letters to the king, which, with the other dispatches, as they are
long, and abound with fiction and bombast rather than truth and facts,
I have not troubled myself to transcribe; they are, besides, in many
printed collections[23].

It appears clearly from these letters, that they were the joint
compositions of Covillan, who knew perfectly the manner of
corresponding with his court upon dangerous subjects, and of the simple
Abyssinian confidents of the empress Helena, who, unacquainted with
embassies or correspondence with princes, or the ill consequence that
these letters would be of to their ambassador and his errand, if they
happened to be intercepted by an enemy, told plainly all they desired
and wished to execute by the assistance of the Portuguese. Thus, in the
first part of the letter, (which we shall suppose dictated by Covillan)
the empress remits the description of her wants, and what is the
subject of the embassy, to Matthew her ambassador, whom she qualifies
as her confidential servant, instructed in her most secret intentions;
desiring the king of Portugal to believe what he shall report from her
to him in private, as if they were her own words uttered immediately
from her to him in person. So far was prudent; such a conduct as we
should expect from a man like Covillan, long accustomed to be trusted
with the secret negociations of his sovereign.

But the latter end of his dispatches (the work, we suppose, of
Abyssinian statesmen) divulges the whole secret. It explains the
motives of this embassy in the clearest manner, desiring the king of
Portugal to send a sufficient force to destroy Mecca and Medina; to
assist them with a sufficient number of ships, and to annihilate the
Turkish power by sea; while they, by land, should extirpate all the
Mahometans on their borders; and it stigmatizes these Mahometans, both
Turks and Moors, with the most opprobrious names it was possible to
devise.

With the first part of these dispatches, it is plain, Matthew, as
an envoy, might have passed unmolested; he had only to give to the
secret wishes of the empress, with which he was charged, what kind
of mercantile colour he pleased. But the last part of the letter
brought home to him a charge of the deepest dye, both of sacrilege
and high-treason, that he meditated against the Ottoman empire, whose
Raya[24] he was; and, there can be no doubt, had these letters been
intercepted and read, Matthew’s embassy and life would have ended
together under some exquisite species of torture. This, indeed,
he seems to have apprehended; as, after his arrival in India, he
constantly refused to shew his dispatches, even to the Portuguese
viceroy himself, from whom, in the instant, he had received very
singular favour and protection.

The king, when of age, never could be brought to acknowledge this
embassy by Matthew; but, as we shall see, did constantly deny it. If
we believe the Portuguese, the despair of the empress was so great,
that she offered one-third of the kingdom to the king of Portugal if he
relieved her. Nothing of this kind appears in the letters; but, if this
offer was part of Matthew’s private dispatches, we may see a reason why
David did not wish to own the commission and offer as his.

Matthew had a safe passage to Dabul in India, but here his misfortunes
began. The governor, taking him for a spy, confined him in close
prison. But Albuquerque, then viceroy of India, residing at Goa, who
had himself a design upon Abyssinia, hearing that such a person, in
such a character, was arrived, sent and took him out of the hands
of the governor of Dabul, where his sufferings else would not have
so quickly ended. All the Portuguese cried out upon seeing such an
ambassador as Matthew sent to their master; sometimes they pretended
that he was a spy of the Sultan, at other times he was an impostor, a
cook, or some other menial servant.

Albuquerque treated with him privately before he landed, to make his
commissions known to him; but he expressly refused shewing any letter
unless to the king himself in Portugal. This behaviour hurt him in the
eyes of the viceroy, who was therefore disposed, with the rest of his
officers, to slight him when he should come ashore. But Matthew, now
out of danger, and knowing his person to be sacred, would no longer
be treated like a private person. He sent to let the viceroy, bishop,
and clergy know, that, besides his consequence as an ambassador, which
demanded their respect, he was the bearer of a piece of wood of the
true cross, which he carried as a present to the king of Portugal;
and, therefore, he required them, as they would avoid an imputation
of sacrilege, to shew to that precious relict the utmost respect, and
celebrate its arrival as a festival. No more was necessary after this.
The whole streets of Goa were filled with processions; the troops
were all under arms; the viceroy, and the principal officers, met
Matthew at his landing, and conveyed him to the palace, where he was
magnificently lodged and feasted. But nothing could long overcome the
prejudices the Portuguese had imbibed upon the first sight of him; and,
notwithstanding he carried a piece of the true cross, both he and it
soon fell into perfect oblivion: Nor was it till 1513, after he had
staid three years in India, that he got leave to proceed to Portugal by
a fleet returning home loaded with spices.

Damianus Goez the historian, though apparently a man of good sense and
candour, cannot conjecture why this Armenian was sent as an ambassador,
and wishes to be resolved why not an Abyssinian nobleman. But it is
obvious from the character I have already given of him, there could
be nobody in the empress’s power that had half his qualifications;
and, besides, an Abyssinian nobleman would not have ventured to go, as
knowing very well that everywhere beyond the limits of his own country
he would have been without protection, and the first Turk in whose
power he might have fallen would have sold him for a slave. In no other
character is any of his nation seen, either in Arabia or India, and
his master has no treaty with any state whatever. Add to this, that an
Abyssinian speaks no language but his own, which is not understood out
of his own country; and is absolutely ignorant even of the existence of
other far distant nations.

But, besides, there was an Abyssinian sent with Matthew, who died; and
here Damianus Goez’s wonder should cease.

The same ill-fortune, which had attended Matthew in India, followed
him in his voyage to Portugal. The Captains of the ships contended
with each other who should behave worst to him; and, in the midst of
all this ill-treatment, the ship which he was on board of arrived at
Lisbon. The king, upon hearing the particulars of this ill usage,
immediately put the offenders in irons, where they had, probably, lain
during their lives, had they not been freed by the intercession of
Matthew.

David (as I have before observed) was only eleven years old[25] when
he was placed upon the throne; and, at his inauguration, took the name
of Lebna Denghel, or the Virgin’s Frankincense; then that of Etana
Denghel, or the Myrrh of the Virgin; and after that, of Wanag Segued,
which signifies Reverenced, or Feared, among the Lions, with whom,
towards the last of his reign, he resided in wilds and mountains more
than with men.

During this minority, there was peace with Mahomet king of Adel.
Maffudi still continued his depredations; and, by his liberality, had
formed strong connections with the Turks in Arabia. In return for the
number of slaves whom he had sent to Mecca, a green silk standard,
(that of Mahomet and of the Faith), and a tent of black velvet,
embroidered with gold, were sent him by the Sherriffe, the greatest
honour a Mahometan could possibly receive, and he was also made Shekh
of the island of Zeyla, which was delivering the key of Abyssinia to
him.

It was not till David had arrived at sixteen years of age that the
constant success of Maffudi, the honours bestowed upon him, and the
gain which accrued from all his expeditions, had at last determined
the king of Adel to break the peace with Abyssinia, and join him.
These princes, with the whole Mahometan force, had fallen together
upon Dawaro, Ifat, and Fatigar; and, in one year, had driven away,
and slain, above nineteen thousand Christians, subjects to the king.
A terror was now spread over the whole kingdom, and great blame laid
both upon the empress and the king, for sitting and looking timidly on,
while the Turks and Moors, year after year, ravaged whole provinces
without resistance.

These murmurs at last roused David, who, for his own part, had not
suffered them willingly so long. He determined immediately to raise an
army, and to command it in person: In vain the empress admonished him
of his danger, and his absolute want of experience in matters of war;
in vain she advised him to employ some of the old officers against the
veteran Moorish troops.

The king answered, That every officer of merit had been tried already,
and baffled from beginning to end, so that the army had no confidence
in them; that he was resolved to take his trial as the others had done,
and leave the event where it ought to be left. Though the diviners all
prophesied ill from this resolution of the king, the generality of the
kingdom, and young nobility, flocked to his standard, rejoicing in a
leader so near their own age. The middle-aged had great hopes of the
vigour of that youth; and the old were not more backward, satisfied of
the weight their years and experience must give them in the councils of
a young king.

Seldom a better army took the field; and the empress, from her own
treasures, furnished every thing, even to superfluity, engaging all
the people of consequence by giving them in the most affable manner,
presents in hand, and magnificent promises of recompence hereafter.
Great as these preparations were, they had not made much impression
among the confederates in Adel; and already the king had put himself at
the head of his army, before the Moors seemed to think it worth their
while to follow him. They were, indeed, at that very time, laying waste
a part of the kingdom of Abyssinia. The king, then, by quick marches,
advanced through Fatigar, as if he was going to Aussa, the capital of
Adel.

Between Fatigar and the plain country of Adel there is a deep large
valley, through which it was necessary the army should pass. Very steep
mountains bound it on every side, whilst two openings (each of them
very narrow) were the only passages by which it was possible to enter
or go out. The king divided his army into two; he kept the best troops
and largest body with himself, and sent Betwudet with the rest, as if
they intended to fight the enemy before they gained the defiles. The
Moors, on the other hand, terrified at what must happen if the king
with his army marched into their defenceless country, accounted it a
great escape to get into these very defiles before they were forced
to an engagement. Betwudet, who desired no more, gave them their way,
and, entering the valley behind them, encamped there. The king, at the
other end, had done the same, unseen by the enemy, who thought he was
advanced on his march to Aussa. The Moors were thus completely hemmed
in, and the king’s army vastly superior. He had ordered his tents to
be left standing, with a body of troops in them, and these completely
covered the only outlet to the valley, whilst Betwudet and his party
had advanced considerably, and made much the same disposition.

The king drew up his troops early in the morning, and offered the
enemy battle, when the whole Abyssinian army was surprised to discover
a backwardness in the Moors so unlike their behaviour at former
times; well they might, when they were informed from whom that panic
among the Moors came. Maffudi, a fanatic from the beginning, whether
really deceived by such a prophecy, or raised to a pitch of pride
and enthusiasm by the honours he had received, and desirous, by a
remarkable death, to deserve the rank of martyr among those of his own
religion, or from whatever cause it arose, came to the king of Adel,
and told him, that his time was now come; that it had been prophesied
to him long ago, that if, that year, he fought the king of Abyssinia in
person, he was there to lose his life: That he knew, for certain, David
was then present, having, with his own eyes, seen the scarlet tent,
(a colour which is only used by the king); he desired, therefore, the
king of Adel to make the best of his way through a less steep part of
the mountain, which he shewed him; to take his family and favourites
along with him, and leave under his command the army to try their
fortune with David. Mahomet, at no time very fond of fighting, never
found himself less so than upon this advice of Maffudi’s. He resolved,
therefore, to follow his council; and, before the battle began,
withdrew himself through the place that was shewn him, and was followed
by a few of his friends.

It was now 9 o’clock, and the sun began to be hot, before which the
Abyssinians never choose to engage, when Maffudi, judging the king of
Adel was beyond danger, sent a trumpet to the Abyssinian camp, with a
challenge to any man of rank in the army to fight him in single combat,
under condition that the victory should be accounted to belong to that
army whose champion was victorious, and that, thereupon, both parties
should withdraw their troops without further bloodshed. It does not
appear whether the conditions were agreed to, but the challenge was
accepted as soon as offered. Gabriel Andreas the monk, who, in the
reign of Naod, had, by the king’s order, lost a part of his tongue
for giving it too much licence, offered himself first to the king,
beseeching him to trust to him that day, his own honour, and the
fortune of the army. The king consented without hesitation, with the
general applause of all the nobility; for Andreas, though a monk, was
a man of great family and distinction; the most learned of the court;
liberal, rich, affable, and remarkable for facetious conversation;
he was, besides, a good soldier, of tried skill and valour, and, in
strength and activity, surpassed by no man in the army.

Maffudi was not backward to present himself; nor was the combat longer
than might be expected from two such willing champions. Gabriel
Andreas, seeing his opportunity, with a two-handed sword struck Maffudi
between the lower part of the neck and the shoulder, so violently, that
he nearly divided his body into two, and felled him dead to the ground.
He then cut his head off, and threw it at the king’s feet, saying,
“There is the Goliath of the Infidels.”

This expression became instantly the word of battle, or signal to
charge. The king, at the head of his troops, rushed upon the Moorish
army, and, throwing them into disorder, drove them back upon Betwudet,
who, with his fresh troops, forced them again back to the king.
Seeing no hopes of relief, they dispersed to the mountains, and were
slaughtered, and hunted like wild beasts by the peasants, or driven
to perish with thirst and hunger. About 12,000 of the Mahometan army
are said to have been slain upon the field, with no very considerable
loss on the side of the conquerors. The green standard of Mahomet was
taken, as also the black velvet tent embroidered with gold; which
last, we shall see, the king gave to the Portuguese ambassador some
time afterwards, to consecrate and say mass in. A vast number of
cattle was taken, and with them much rich merchandise of the Indies.
Nor did the king content himself with what he had got in battle. He
advanced and encamped at a place where was held the first market of
Adel[26]. The next day he proceeded to a town where was a house of the
king, and, going up to the door, and finding it locked, he struck the
door with his lance, and nobody answering, he prohibited the soldiers
from plundering it, and retired with his army home, leaving his lance
sticking in the door as a sign of his having been there, and having had
it in his power.

Though the king was received on his return amidst the greatest
acclamations of his subjects, as the saviour of his country, the eyes
of the whole nation and army were first fixed on Andreas, whose bravery
had at last delivered them from that constant and inveterate scourge,
Maffudi. Every body pressed forward to throw flowers and green branches
in his way; the women celebrating him with songs, putting garlands on
his head, and holding out the young children to see him as he passed.
The battle was fought in the month of July 1516; and, the same day,
the island of Zeyla, in the mouth of the Red Sea, was taken, and its
town burned by the Portuguese armament, under Lopez Suarez Alberguiera.

Neither the suspicions transmitted from India, nor the mean person of
Matthew the ambassador, seem to have made any impression upon the king
of Portugal. He received him with every sort of honour, and testified
the most profound respect for his master, and attention to the errand
he came upon. Matthew was lodged and maintained with the utmost
splendour; and, considering the great use of so powerful a friend on
the African coast of the Red Sea, where his fleets would meet with
all sort of provision and protection, while they pursued the Turkish
squadrons, he prepared an embassy on his part, and sent Matthew home on
board the fleet commanded by Lopez Suarez for India.

Edward Galvan, a man of capacity and experience, who had filled the
offices of secretary of state and ambassador in Spain, France, and
Germany, arrived at that time of life when he might reasonably expect
to pass the rest of his days in ease, wealth, and honour, found himself
unexpectedly chosen, at the age of eighty-six, to go ambassador from
his sovereign to Abyssinia. Goez had much more reason to wonder at the
ambassador fixed upon by his master, than at that of Abyssinia sent by
the empress Helena to Portugal. The fleet under Suarez entered the Red
Sea, and anchored at the flat island of Camaran, close on the coast of
Arabia Felix, one of the most unwholesome places he could have chosen.
Here Edward Galvan died; and here Suarez, most ignorantly, resolved to
pass the winter, which he did, suffering much for want of every sort
of provision but water; whereas twenty-four hours of any wind would
have carried him to Masuah, to his journey’s end; where, if he had lost
the monsoon, he would still have had great abundance of necessaries,
and been in the way every moment of promoting the wishes of his master.

Lopez de Segueyra succeeded the ignorant Suarez, who had returned to
India. He fitted out a strong fleet at Goa, with which he entered the
Red Sea, and sailed for the island of Masuah, where he arrived the 16th
of April 1520, having Matthew along with him. Upon the first approach
of the fleet, the inhabitants, both of the island and town, abandoned
them, and fled to Arkeeko on the main land. Segueyra having remained
before Masuah a few days without committing any hostilities, there came
at last to him a Christian and a Moor from the continent; who informed
him that the main-land, then before him, was part of the kingdom of
Abyssinia, governed by an officer called Baharnagash: they added,
that the reason of their flying at the sight of the fleet was, that
the Turks frequently made descents, and ravaged the island; but that
all the inhabitants of the continent were Christians. The Portuguese
general was very joyful on this intelligence, and began to treat
Matthew more humanely, finding how truly and exactly he had described
these places. He gave, both to the Christian and Moor that came off to
him, a rich vest; commended them for having fled to Arkeeko rather than
expose themselves to an attack from the Turks, but directed them to
assure the people on the continent, that they too were all Christians,
and under the command of the king of Abyssinia; being arrived there
purposely for his service, so that they might return, whenever they
should please, in perfect safety.

The next day, came down to the shore the governor of Arkeeko,
accompanied with thirty horsemen, and above two hundred foot. He was
mounted on a fine horse, and dressed in a kind of shirt resembling
that of the Moors. The governor brought down four oxen, and received
in return certain pieces of silk, with which he was well pleased. A
very familiar conversation followed; the governor kindly inviting the
Portuguese general ashore, assuring him that the Baharnagash, under
whose command he was, had already intelligence of his arrival.

In answer to his inquiries about the religion of the country, the
governor told him, that in a mountain, then in sight, twenty-four miles
distant, there was a convent called _the Monastery of Bisan_, (which
Matthew had often described in the voyage) whose monks, being informed
of his arrival, had deputed seven of their number to wait upon him,
whom the Portuguese general went to meet accordingly, and received them
in the kindest manner.

These monks, as soon as they saw Matthew, broke out into the warmest
expressions of friendship and esteem, congratulating him with tears in
their eyes upon his long voyage and absence. The Portuguese general
then invited the monks on board his vessel, where he regaled them, and
gave to each presents that were most suitable to their austere life. On
his side, Segueyra chose seven Portuguese, with Peter Gomez Tessera,
auditor of the East Indies, who understood Arabic very well, to return
the visit of the monks, and see the monastery of Bisan. This short
journey they very happily performed. Tessera brought back a parchment
manuscript, which he received as a present from the monks, to be sent
to the king of Portugal.

It was on the 24th of April that the Baharnagash arrived at Arkeeko,
having before sent information of his intended visit. The Portuguese
general, who never doubted but that he would come to the sea-side,
pitched his tents, and spread his carpets and cushions on the ground to
receive him. But it was signified to him from the Baharnagash, who was
probably afraid of putting himself under the guns of the fleet, that
he did not intend to advance so far, and that the governor should meet
him half way. This being agreed to on both sides, they sat down on the
grass.

The Baharnagash began the conversation, by telling the Portuguese,
they had, in virtue of certain prophecies, been long expected in this
country; and that he, and all the officers of Abyssinia, were ready to
do them every service and kindness. After the Portuguese general had
returned a proper answer, the priests and monks concluded the interview
with certain religious services. Segueyra then made the Baharnagash
a present of a very fine suit of complete armour with some pieces of
silk; while the Baharnagash, on his side, made the return with a very
fine horse and mule.

All doubt concerning Matthew was removed at this interview; he was
acknowledged as a genuine ambassador. The Portuguese now flocked to
Segueyra, beseeching him to choose from among his men, who should
accompany him to the court. The first step was to name Roderigo de
Lima ambassador from the king of Portugal, instead of Galvan, who was
dead; and, for his suite, George de Breu, Lopez de Gama, John Scolare
secretary to the ambassador, John Gonsalvez his factor and interpreter,
Emmanuel de Mare organist, Peter Lopez, Master John his physician,
Gaspar Pereira, and Lazarus d’Andrad a painter. The three chaplains
were John Fernandes, Peter Alphonso Mendez, and Francisco Alvarez. In
this company also went Matthew, the Abyssinian ambassador returned from
Portugal, and with him three Portuguese, one called Magailanes, the
other Alvaremgo, and the third Diego Fernandes.

It seemed probable, the severe blow which David had given to the king
of Adel, by the total destruction of his army on the death of his
general Maffudi, would have procured a cessation of hostilities to
the Abyssinian frontiers, which they had not experienced during the
life of that general; but it appeared afterwards, that, increased in
riches and population by the great accession of power which followed
the interruption of the Indian trade in Arabia by the Turkish conquest,
far from entertaining thoughts of peace, they were rather meditating a
more formidable manner of attack, by training themselves to the use of
fire-arms and artillery, of which they had provided a quantity, and to
which the Abyssinians were as yet strangers.

The king was encamped in Shoa, covering and keeping in awe his
Mahometan provinces, Fatigar and Dawaro; besides which he seemed to
have no object but the conquest of the Dobas, that bordered equally
upon the Moorish and Christian frontiers, and who (though generally
gained by the Mahometans) were, when occasion offered, enemies to
both. The Shum[27] of Giannamora, a small district belonging to
Abyssinia, full of brave soldiers, and considerably reinforced by David
for the very purpose, had the charge of bringing these barbarians to
subjection, as being their immediate neighbour.

The king had afterwards advanced eastward to the frontiers of Fatigar,
but was still in the southern part of his dominions. The ambassador
and his retinue were landed on the north. They were to cross the
whole extent of the empire through woods and over mountains, the
like of which are not known in Europe, full of savage beasts, and
men more savage than the beasts themselves; intersected by large
rivers, and what was the worst circumstance, swelling every day by the
tropical rains. Frequently deserts of no considerable length, indeed,
intervened, where no sustenance was to be found for man or beast, nor
relief for accidental misfortunes. Yet such was the bravery of that
small company, that they hesitated not a moment to undertake this
enterprise. Every thing was thought easy which contributed to the glory
of their king, and the honour of their country.

It was not long before this gallant company found need of all their
constancy and courage; for in their short journey to the convent of St
Michael (the first they attempted) they found the wood so thick that
there was scarcely passage for either man or beast. Briers and thorns,
too, of a variety of species, which they had never before seen, added
greatly to the fatigue which the thickness of the woods had occasioned.
Mountains presented themselves over mountains, broken into terrible
precipices and ravines, by violent torrents and constant storms; their
black and bare tops seemed as it were calcined by the rays of a burning
sun, and by incessant lightnings and thunder. Great numbers of wild
beasts also presented themselves everywhere in these dark forests,
and seemed only to be hindered from devouring them by their wonder
at seeing so many men in so lonely a situation. At last the woods
began to grow thinner, and some fields appeared where the people were
sitting armed, guarding their small flocks of half-starved goats and
kine, and crops of millet, of which they saw a considerable quantity
sown. The men were black, their hair very gracefully plaited, and were
altogether naked, excepting a small piece of leather that covered their
middle. At this place they were met by twelve monks, four of whom were
distinguished by their advanced years and the respect paid to them by
the others.

Having rested their mules and camels a short time, they again began
their journey by the side of a great lake, near which was a very high
mountain, and this they were too weary to attempt to pass. Full of
discontent and despondency, they halted at the foot of this mountain,
where they passed the night, having received a cow for supper, a
present from the convent. Here Matthew (the ambassador) separated
his baggage from that of the caravan, and left it to the care of
the monks. He had probably made some little money in Portugal; and,
distrusting his reception with the king, wisely determined to place it
out of danger. The precaution, however, proved superfluous; for, a
few days after, an epidemical fever began to manifest itself, which,
in eight-and-forty hours, carried off Matthew, and soon after Pereira,
the servant of Don Roderigo; so that no opportunity now offered for an
explanation with the king about his or the empress’s promise of ceding
one-third of the kingdom to the Portuguese in case the king would send
them succour. Terrified by the fever, and the bad prospect of the
weather, they resumed their journey.

The monastery of Bisan (to which they were now going) is so called from
the great quantity of water which is everywhere found about it. The
similitude of sound has made Poncet[28], and several other travellers,
call it the Monastery of the Vision; but Bisan (water) is its true
name, being plentifully supplied with that most valuable element. A
number of lakes and rivers are interspersed through its plains; while
abundant springs, that are never dry, flow from the top of each rock,
dashing their rills against the rugged projections of the cliffs below.

The monastery of Bisan, properly so called, is the head of six others
in the compass of 26 miles; each convent placed like a tower on the top
of its own rock. That upon which Bisan is situated is very high, and
almost perpendicular; and from this rises another still higher than it,
which, unless to its inhabitants, is perfectly inaccessible. It is, on
every side, surrounded with wood, interspersed with fruit-trees of many
different kinds, as well of those known as of those unknown in Europe.
Oranges, citrons, and limes are in great abundance; wild peaches and
small figs of a very indifferent quality; black grapes, on loaded
branches, hang down from the barren timber round which they are twined,
and afford plentiful supply to man and beast: The fields are covered
with myrtles and many species of jessamin; with roses too of various
colours; but fragrance is denied to them all, except one sort, which is
the white one, single-leafed[29].

The monks of these convents were said once to be about a thousand
in number. They have a large territory, and pay a tribute in cows
and horses to the Baharnagash, who is their superior. Their horses
are esteemed good, as coming from the neighbourhood of the Arabs.
However, though I had the absolute choice of them all during the time
I commanded the king’s guard, I never could draw from that part of the
country above a score of sufficient strength and size to bear a man in
complete armour.

I shall now leave Don Roderigo to pursue his journey towards the king
at Shoa. The history of it, and of his embassy, published at large
by Alvarez his chaplain, has not met, from the historians of his
own country, with a reception which favours the authenticity of its
narrative. There are, indeed, in the whole of it, and especially where
religion is concerned, many things very difficult of belief, which seem
to be the work of the Jesuits some years posterior to the time in which
Alvarez was in Abyssinia. Tellez condemns him, though a writer of those
times; and Damianus Goez, one of the first historians, says, that he
had seen a journal written in Alvarez’s own name, very different from
the journal that is gone forth to the public. For my part, I can only
say, that what is related of the first audience with the king, and many
of the following pages, seem to me to be fabrications of people that
never have been in Abyssinia; and, if this is the case, no imputation
can be laid against Francisco Alvarez, as, perhaps, he is not the
author of the misrepresentation in question. But, as to the cordiality
with which the Catholic religion was received by the monks and people
in general, during the long stay and bad reception Don Roderigo met
with, I have no sort of doubt that this is a falsehood, and this must
be charged directly to his account.

We have already seen that, early as Zara Jacob’s time, the religion
of the Franks was held in the utmost detestation, and that in Bæda
Mariam’s reign the whole country was in rebellion, because the king had
directed the Virgin Mary to be painted by one Branca Leon, a Venetian
painter, then alive, and in court, when Don Roderigo de Lima was with
the king in Shoa. Iscander and Naod were both strict in the tenets of
the church of Alexandria; and two Abunas, Imaranha Christos, who lived
till Iscander’s time, and Abuna Marcus, alive in Alvarez’s, had given
no allowance for strange or foreign worship to be introduced. How the
Catholic could be so favourably and generally received in the time of
Alvarez is what I cannot conceive. Blood enough was spilt immediately
afterwards, to shew that this affection to the Roman Catholic religion,
if any such there was in Alvarez’s time, must have been merely
transitory. When, therefore, I find any thing in this journal plainly
misunderstood, I explain and vindicate it; where I see there is a fact
deliberately misrepresented, such as the celebration of the Epiphany,
I refute it from ocular demonstration. The rest of the journal I
leave _in medio_ to the judgment of my reader, who will find it at
his bookseller’s; only observing, that there can be no doubt that the
journey itself was made by Don Roderigo, and the persons named with him.

I have preserved the several stations of these travellers in my map,
though a great part of the countries through which they passed is now
in the hands of the Galla, and is as inaccessible to Abyssinians as it
is to strangers.

There are two particulars in Alvarez’s account of this journey which
very much surprise me. The first is, the daily and constant danger this
company was in from tigers, so daring as to present themselves within
pike-length. Of this I have taken notice in the appendix when speaking
of the hyæna.

The other particular relates to the field of beans through which they
passed. I never yet saw this sort of grain, or pulse, in Abyssinia.
The lupine, a wild plant, somewhat similar, chiefly infects those
provinces from which the honey comes, and is regarded there with the
utmost aversion. The reason of which will be seen in the sequel. But
as these Mahometans, through whose country Don Roderigo passed, are
not indigenous, and never had any connection with the ancient state
of manners or religion of this country, it is more than probable the
cultivation of the bean is no older than the settlement of these
Mahometans here, long after the Pythagorean prejudices against that
plant were forgotten.

It was on the 16th of April 1520 that Don Roderigo de Lima landed
in Abyssinia; and it was the 16th of October of the same year when
he arrived within sight of the king’s camp, distant about three
miles. The king had advanced, as hath been said, into Fatigar, about
twenty-five miles from the first fair in the kingdom of Adel, and
something less than two hundred from the port of Zeyla. The ambassador,
after so painful a journey, expected an immediate admission into the
king’s presence. Instead of which, a great officer, called _the Hadug
Ras_[30], which is chief or commander of the asses, was sent to carry
him three miles farther distant, where they ordered him to pitch
his tent, and five years passed in the embassy afterwards before he
procured his dismission.

Alvarez accounts very lamely for this prodigious interval of time; and,
excepting the celebration of the Epiphany, he does not mention one
remarkable occurrence in the whole of this period. One would imagine
their stay had not been above a month, and that one conversation only
passed upon business, which I shall here set down as a specimen of the
humour the parties were in the one with the other.

The king carried the ambassador to see the church Mecana Selassé, the
church of the Trinity, which was then repairing, where many of the
kings had been buried while the Royal family resided in Shoa. All the
churches in Abyssinia are thatched. Some of Roderigo’s own retinue, who
bore him ill-will, had put it into the king’s head how elegant this
church would be if covered with lead, a thing he certainly could have
no idea of. He asked Don Roderigo, whether the king of Portugal could
not send him as much sheet-lead as would serve to cover that church?
To which the ambassador replied, That the king of Portugal, upon bare
mentioning the thing, would send him as much sheet-lead[31] as would
cover not only that church, but all the other churches he should ever
build in Abyssinia; and, after all, the present would be but a trifling
one.

Immediately upon this the king changed his discourse; and observed to
the ambassador, in a very serious tone of voice, “That, since they
were now upon the subject of presents, he could not help letting the
king of Portugal know, that, if ever he sent an ambassador again into
that country, he should take care to accompany him with presents of
value, for otherwise stranger ambassadors that ventured to come before
him without these were very ill received.” To which the ambassador
returned warmly, “That it was very far from being the custom of the
king of Portugal to send presents to any king upon earth; that, having
no superior, it was usual for him, only to receive them from others,
and to accept them or not, according to his royal pleasure; for it was
infinitely below him to consider what was the value of the present
itself. He then desired the king of Abyssinia might be informed, that
he, Don Roderigo, came ambassador from the general of the Indies, and
not from the king of Portugal; nevertheless, when the king of Portugal
had lately dispatched Galvan, who had died upon the road, ambassador
to his highness, he had sent with him presents to the value of 100,000
ducats, consulting his own greatness, but not considering himself as
under any obligation to send any presents at all; and as to the many
scandalous aspersions that had been thrown upon him by mean people,
which the king had given credit to, and were made constantly part of
his discourse, he wished his highness, from the perusal of the letters
which he had brought from the general of the Indies, to learn, that the
Portuguese were not accustomed to use lying and dissimulation in their
conversations, but to tell the naked truth; to which he the ambassador
had strictly confined himself in every circumstance he had related to
his highness, if he pleased to believe him; if not, that he was very
welcome to do just whatever he thought better in his own eyes. Yet
he would, once for all, have his highness to know, that, though he
came only as ambassador from the general of the Indies, he could, as
such, have presented himself before the greatest sovereign upon earth,
without being subjected to hear such conversation as he had been daily
exposed to from his highness, which he, as a Portuguese nobleman and
a soldier, though he had been no ambassador at all, was not any way
disposed to suffer, and therefore he desired his immediate dismission.”

Upon this the king said, “That the distinction he had shewn him was
such as he would never have met with from any of his predecessors,
having brought no present of any value.” To which the ambassador
replied in great warmth, “That he had received no distinction in this
country whatever, but only injuries and wrongs; that he should think he
became a martyr if he died in this country where he had been robbed
of every thing, except the clothes upon his back; that Matthew, who
was but a pretended ambassador, had been much otherwise treated by
the king of Portugal; but for himself he desired nothing but a speedy
dismission, having delivered his letters and done his errand: Till that
time, he should expect to be treated like a man of honour, above lying
or falsehood.” To this the king answered, “That he believed him to be
a man of honour, worth, and veracity, but that Matthew was a liar: at
the same time he wished Don Roderigo to know, that he was perfectly
informed what degree of respect and good usage Matthew had met with
from the king of Portugal’s officers and captains, but that he did not
impute this to Don Roderigo.”

There was a rumour at court which very much alarmed the ambassador; it
was, that the king intended to detain him according to the invariable
custom and practice of his country. Two Venetians, Nicholas Branca Leon
and Thomas Gradinego, had been forcibly detained since the reign of
Bæda Mariam. But what terrified Don Roderigo still more, as a case most
similar to his, was the sight of Peter Covillan then in court, who had
been sent ambassador by John king of Portugal to Iscander, and ever
since was detained without being able to get leave to return, but was
obliged to marry and settle in the country.

What was the emperor’s real intention is impossible now to know;
but, having resolved to send an Abyssinian ambassador to the king of
Portugal, it was necessary to dismiss Don Roderigo likewise. However,
he did not entirely abandon the whole of his design, but forcibly
detained Master John the secretary, and Lazarus d’Andrad the painter,
and obliged Don Roderigo to depart without them. Zaga Zaab, an
Abyssinian monk, who had learned the Portuguese language by waiting on
Don Roderigo during his stay in Abyssinia, was chosen for the function;
and they set out together for Masuah, plentifully furnished with every
thing necessary for the journey, and arrived safely there without
any remarkable occurrence, where they found Don Hector de Silveyra,
governor of the Indies, with his fleet, waiting to carry Don Roderigo
de Lima home. Whether the king had changed his mind or not is doubtful;
but, on the 27th of April 1526, arrived four messengers from court
with orders for Don Roderigo to return, and also to bring Don Hector
along with him. This was immediately and directly refused; but it was
left in the power of Zaga Zaab to return if he pleased, who however
declared, that, if he staid behind, he should be thrown to the lions.
He, therefore, went on board with great readiness, and they all sailed
from Masuah on the 28th of April of the year just mentioned, in their
return to India.

These frequent intercourses with the Portuguese had given great alarm
to the Mahometan powers, though neither the king of Abyssinia, nor the
Portuguese themselves, had reaped any profit from them, or the several
fleets that had arrived at Masuah, which had really no end but to seek
the ambassador Don Roderigo. The six years spent in wrangling and
childish behaviour, both on the part of the king and the ambassador,
had an appearance of something serious between the two powers; and
what still alarmed the Moors more was, that no part of the secret had
transpired, because no scheme had really been concerted, only mere
proposals of vain and idle enterprises, without either power or will
to put them in execution. Such were the plans of a joint army, to
attack Arabia, and to conquer it down to Jerusalem. The Turks[32] were
on their progress southward in great force; they had conquered Arabia
in less than half the time Don Roderigo had spent quarrelling with
the king about pepper and mules; and a storm was ready to break in a
quarter least expected.

In the gentle reigns of the Mamalukes, before the conquest of Egypt
and Arabia by Selim[33], a caravan constantly set out from Abyssinia
directly for Jerusalem. They had then a treaty with the Arabs. This
caravan rendezvoused at Hamazen, a small territory abounding in
provisions, about two days journey from Dobarwa, and nearly the same
from Masuah; it amounted sometimes in number to a thousand pilgrims,
ecclesiastics as well as laymen. They travelled by very easy journies,
not above six miles a-day, halting to perform divine service, and
setting up their tents early, and never beginning to travel till
towards nine in the morning. They had, hitherto, passed in perfect
safety, with drums beating and colours flying, and, in this way,
traversed the desert by the road of Suakem.

The year after Selim had taken possession of Cairo, Abba Azerata
Christos, a monk famous for holiness, had conducted fifteen hundred
of these pilgrims with him to Jerusalem, and they had arrived without
accident; but, on their return, they had fallen in with a body of
Selim’s troops, who slew a great part of them, and forced others to
take refuge in the desert, where they perished with hunger and thirst.
In the year 1525, another caravan assembled at Hamazen, consisting of
336 friars and priests, and fifteen nuns. They set out from Hamazen on
the 12th day after leaving this place, travelling slowly; and, being
loaded with provisions and water, they were attacked by the Moors of
that district, and utterly defeated and robbed. Of the pilgrims taken
prisoners, all the old men were put to the sword, and the young were
sold for slaves; so that of 336 persons fifteen only escaped, but
three of which lived to return to Shoa at the time the ambassador was
there. This was the first vengeance the Moors to the northward had
yet taken for the alliance made with the Portuguese; and, from this
time, the communication with Cairo through the desert ceased as to the
Christians, and was carried on by Mahometans only.

Since the time of Peter Covillan’s arrival in Abyssinia, the views of
all parties had very much changed. The Portuguese at first coveted
the friendship of Abyssinia, for the sake of obtaining through it a
communication with India. But they now became indifferent about that
intercourse, since they had settled in India itself, and found the
convenience of the passage of the Cape of Good Hope. David, freed
from his fears of the Moors of Adel, whom he had defeated, and seeing
the great power of the Turks, so much apprehended after the conquest
of Egypt, disappointed in India in all their attempts against the
Portuguese settlements there; being, moreover, displeased with the
abrupt behaviour of the ambassador Don Roderigo, and the promises the
empress Helena had made by Matthew without his knowledge, he wished
no further connection with the Portuguese, for whose assistance, he
thought, he should have no use.

Selim, whose first object was the conquest of India, had met there so
rude a reception that he began to despair of further success in his
undertaking; but, having conquered Arabia on one side of the Red Sea,
he was desirous of extending his dominions to the other also, and
for three reasons: The first was, that the safety of the holy place
of Mecca would be much endangered should a Portuguese army and fleet
rendezvous in Abyssinia, and be joined by an army there. The second,
that his ships and gallies could not be in security at the bottom of
the Gulf, should the Portuguese obtain leave to fortify any island
or harbour belonging to the Abyssinians. The third, that the king of
Abyssinia being, as he was taught to believe, the prince whom the
prophet Mahomet had honoured with his correspondence, he thought it
a duty incumbent upon him to convert this prince and kingdom to the
Mahometan religion by the sword, a method allowable in no religion but
that of Mahomet and of Rome.

The ancient and feeble arms of lances and bows, carried by half-naked
peasants assembled in haste and at random for an occasion, were now
laid aside. In place of these, Selim had left garrisons of veteran
troops in all the sea-coast towns of Arabia, exercised in fire-arms,
and furnished with large trains of artillery, supported by a large
fleet which, though destined against the Portuguese in India, and
constantly beat by them, never failed, both going and coming, to
reinforce their posts in Arabia with stores and fresh soldiers.

The empress Helena died in 1525, the year before the Portuguese embassy
ended, after having brought about an interview between the two nations,
which, by the continual disavowal of Matthew’s embassy, it is plain
that David knew not how to turn to his advantage. Soon after her death,
the king prepared to renew the war with the Moors, without having
received the least advantage from the Portuguese. But very differently
had the people of Adel employed this interval of peace. They had
strengthened themselves by the strictest friendship with the Turkish
officers in Arabia, especially with the basha of Zibit, a large trading
port nearly opposite to Masuah. A Turkish garrison was put into Zeyla;
and a Turk, with a large train of artillery, commanded in it. All was
ready against the first invasion the king was to make, and he was now
marching directly towards their country.

The first retaliation, for the Portuguese friendship, (as we have
already observed) had been the cutting off the caravan for Jerusalem.
In revenge for this, the king had marched into Dawaro, and sent a body
of troops from that province to see what was the state of the Moorish
forces in Adel. These were no sooner arrived on the frontiers of that
kingdom, than they were met by a number of the enemy appointed to
guard those confines, and, coming to blows, the Abyssinians defeated,
and drove them into the desert parts of their own country. The king
still advanced till he met the Mahometan army, and a battle was fought
at Shimbra Coré, where the Abyssinian army was totally defeated; the
Betwudet, Hadug Ras, the governor of Amhara, Robel, governor of the
mountain of Geshen, with the greatest part of the nobility, and four
thousand men, were all slain.

Mahomet, called Gragnè, (which signifies _left-handed_) commanded this
army. He was governor of Zeyla, and had promoted the league with the
Turkish bashas on the coast of Arabia; and, having now given the king
a check in his first enterprise, he resolved to carry on the war with
him in a way that should produce something decisive. He remained then
quiet two years at home, sent all the prisoners he had made in the
last expedition to Mecca, and to the Turkish powers on the coast, and
required from them in return the number of troops stipulated, with a
train of portable artillery, which was punctually furnished, while a
large body of janizaries crossed over and joined the Moorish army.
Mahomet led these troops straight into Fatigar, which he over-ran, as
he did the two other neighbouring provinces Ifat and Dawaro, burning
and laying waste the whole country, and driving, as was his usual
manner, immense numbers of the inhabitants, whom the sword had spared,
back with him to Adel.

The next year, Mahomet marched from Adel directly into Dawaro,
committing the same excesses. The king, who saw in despair that total
ruin threatened his whole country, and that there were no hopes but in
a battle, met the Moorish army at Ifras, very much inferior to them in
every sort of appointment. The battle was fought 1st May 1528; the king
was defeated, and Islam Segued, his first minister, who commanded the
army that day, with many of his principal officers, were slain upon the
spot, and the Moorish army took possession of Shoa. David retreated
with his broken army into Amhara, and encamped at Hegu, thinking to
procure reinforcements during the bad weather, but Gragnè was too near
to give him time for this. He entered Amhara, destroying all before
him. The second of November he burnt the church of Mecana Selassé of
the holy sepulchre, and Atronsa Mariam; and, on the 8th of the same
month, Ganeta Georgis; on the 2d of December, Debra Agezia-beher; the
6th of the same month, St Stephen’s church; after which he returned to
Adel with his booty.

The following year Gragnè returned in April, plundered and burnt
Warwar, and wintered there. In the year 1530 Gragnè invaded the
province of Tigré in the month of October, while the king, who had
wintered in Dembea, marched up to Woggora; thence, in December, he went
to Tsalamet, and returned to Tigré to keep the feast of the Epiphany.

The king, next year, marched through Tzegadé, and Gragnè close followed
him, as if he had been hunting a wild beast rather than making war.
The 2d of January he burnt Abba Samuel, then went down into Mazaga
the borders of Sennaar to a conference with Muchtar, one of his
confederates, when it was resolved that they should fight the king
wherever they could meet him, and attach themselves to his person
alone. Gragnè by forced marches overtook the king upon the Nile at
Delakus, the 6th of February, and offered him battle, knowing the
proud spirit of David, that he would not refuse, however great the
disproportion was.

The event was such as might be expected. Fortune again declared against
the king. Negadé Yasous, Acab Saat, and many others of the nobility
perished, fighting to the last, in the sight of their sovereign. In
this battle the brave monk, Andreas[34], much advanced in years, was
slain, behaving with the greatest gallantry, unwilling to survive the
ruin of his country.

The Moors now found it unnecessary to keep together an army. They
divided into small parties, that they might more effectually and
speedily ruin the country. Part of Gragnè’s army was detached to burn
Axum; the other under Simeon continued in Amhara to watch the king’s
motions; and, while he attempted to relieve Axum, dispersed his army,
on which the town was burnt, and with it many of the richest churches
in Abyssinia, Hallelujah, Banquol, Gaso, Debra Kerbé, and many others.
And, on the 7th of April, Saul, son of Tesfo Yasous, fought another
detachment of the Moorish army, and was cut to pieces.

The 28th year of his reign, 1536, the king crossed the Tacazzé, and had
many disastrous encounters with the people of Siré and Serawé. Tesfo
l’Oul, who commanded in this latter province for the king, surprised
a Turkish party under Adli, whom he slew, and met with the same fate
himself from Abbas, Moorish governor of Serawé, when a great many of
the principal people of that province were there slain. Galila, a large
island in the lake Tzana, was plundered, and the convent upon it burnt.
It was one of the principal places where the Abyssinians hid their
treasure, and a great booty was found there.

In the following year, Gragnè, in a message represented to him, that
he might see he was fighting against God, exhorting him to be wise,
and make his peace in time, which he should have upon the condition of
giving him his daughter in marriage, and he would then withdraw his
army, otherwise he would never leave Abyssinia till he had reduced
it to a condition of producing nothing but grass. But the king,
nothing daunted, returned him for answer, That he was an infidel, and
a blasphemer, used as an instrument to chastise him and his people
for their many sins; that it was his duty to bear the correction
patiently; but that it would soon happen, when this just purpose was
answered, that he would be destroyed, and all those with him, as such
wicked instruments had always been; that he the king, and Abyssinia
his kingdom, would be preserved as a monument of the mercy of God, who
never entirely forsook his people, though he might chastise them.

Indeed, the condition of the country was now such that a total
destruction seemed to be at hand; for a famine and plague, its constant
companion, raged in Abyssinia, carrying off those that the sword had
spared.

Gideon and Judith, king and queen of the Jews, in the high country of
Samen, after having suffered much from Gragnè, had at last rebelled and
joined him; and the king, who it seems continued to shew an inclination
to the Catholic church, which he had imbibed during the embassy of Don
Roderigo, by this had occasioned many to fall off from him, he and the
court observing Easter according to the Roman kalendar, while the rest
of the clergy and kingdom continued firm to that of Alexandria.

At this time Osman of Dawaro, Jonadab, Kefla, Yousef, and other rebel
Abyssinians, part of Ammer’s army, one of Gragnè’s generals, surprised
the king’s eldest son, Victor, going to join his father the 7th day of
March; slew him, and dispersed his army. Three days after, the king
himself came to action, with Ammer at Zaat in Waag, but he was there
again beaten, and his youngest son Menas was taken prisoner. The king
had scarce now an attendant, and, being almost alone, he took refuge
among the rocks and bushes in a high mountain called _Tsalem_, in the
district of Tsalamet. But he had not remained above a day there, when
he was followed by Joram, (rebel-master of that district) and narrowly
escaped being taken as he was crossing the Tacazzé on foot and alone;
whence he took refuge on mount Tabor, a very high mountain in Siré, and
there he passed the winter.

The amazing spirit and constancy of the king, who alone seemed not to
forsake the cause of his kingdom, who now, without children or army,
still singly, made war for the liberty of his country, astonished all
Abyssinia as well friends as enemies. Every veteran soldier, therefore,
that could escape the small parties of the Moors which surrounded the
king, joined him at Tabor, and he was again at the head of a very
small, but brave body of troops, though it was scarcely known in what
part of the kingdom he was hid. When Achmet-eddin, lieutenant of Ammer,
passed through Siré, loaded with the spoils of the churches and towns
he had plundered, the king, finding him within his reach, descended
from the mountain, and, by a sudden march, surprised and slew him with
his own hand, leaving the greatest part of his army dead on the field.
After which he distributed the booty among his small army.

Ammer, the king’s mortal enemy, who had taken upon himself the
destruction of the royal family, descended into the province of Siré,
and neighbourhood of Tabor, and there indulged himself in the most
wanton cruelties, torturing and murdering the priests, burning churches
and villages, hoping by this the king would lose his temper, and leave
his strong-hold in the mountain. But hearing at the same time, that a
large quantity of plate, and other treasure, belonging to the church
Debra Kerbé, had been carried into an island in the lake Tzana for
safety, he left the king, and seized his booty in the lake to a very
great amount.

However, he there fell ill of a fever; but, on his return, was so
far advanced in his recovery as to resume his schemes of destroying
the king; when, the night of the 10th of February 1538, while he was
sleeping in bed in his tent, a common soldier, from what quarrel or
cause is not known, went secretly and stabbed him several times in the
belly with a two-edged knife, so that he died instantly, to David’s
great relief, and much to the safety of the whole kingdom.

It was now 12 years since Don Roderigo de Lima had sailed from Masuah,
carrying with him Zaga Zaab ambassador from the king of Abyssinia.
This embassy arrived safe in Lisbon, and was received with great
magnificence by king John; but, as the circumstances of the kingdom
when he left Masuah were really flourishing, and as the treatment he
met in Portugal was better than he had, probably, ever experienced at
home, he seems to have been in no haste to put an end to this embassy.
On the other side, the king of Portugal’s affairs in India were arrived
at that degree of prosperity and power, that little use remained for
such an ally as the king of Abyssinia.

The Moorish trade and navigation to India had already received a fatal
blow, as well from the Portuguese themselves, as from the fall of the
Mamalukes in Egypt; and Soliman, and his servant Sinan Basha, by their
conquest, and introducing soldiers who had not any idea or talent for
trade, but only plunder and rapine, had given a finishing stroke to
what the discovery of the Cape of Good Hope began. The filling Arabia
with fire-arms and Turks was now of consequence to none but to David;
and of such a consequence it had been, that, as we have seen, in the
course of 12 years it had left him nothing in Abyssinia but the bare
name of king, and a life so precarious that it could not be counted
upon from one day’s end to the other.

David had detained in Abyssinia two Portuguese, one called Master John,
the other Lazarus d’Andrad a painter, being two of Don Roderigo’s train
that came from the Indies with him. The Abuna (Mark) was become old and
incapable, and, since the Turkish conquest of Egypt, very indifferent
to, and unconnected with, what passed at Cairo. Before he died, at the
king’s desire he had appointed John his successor, and accordingly
ordained him Abuna, as well as having first given him all the inferior
orders at once; for John was a layman and student in physic; a very
simple creature, but a great bigot; and we shall from henceforward call
him John Bermudes.

John very willingly consented to his ordination, provided the pope
approved of it; and he set out for Rome, not by the usual way of
India, but through Arabia and Egypt; and, arriving there without
accident, was confirmed by Paul III. the then pope, not only as
patriarch of Abyssinia, but of Alexandria likewise; to which he added,
as Bermudes says, the most unintelligible and incomprehensible title
of Patriarch of the Sea. Bermudes, to this variety of charges, had
this other added to him, of ambassador from King David to the court
of Portugal; and for this he was certainly very fit, however he might
be for his ecclesiastical dignities; for he had been now 12 years in
Abyssinia, knew the country well, and had been witness of the variety
of distresses which, following close one upon another, had brought this
country to its then state of ruin.

While these things passed in the north of Abyssinia, a terrible
catastrophe happened in the south. A Mahometan chief, called Vizir
Mudgid, governor of Arar, having an opportunity from his situation to
hear of the riches which were daily carried from churches, and other
places, for safety into the mountain of Geshen, took a resolution to
attempt that natural fortress, though in itself almost impregnable, and
strengthened by an army constantly encamped at the foot of it.

When Mudgid arrived near the mountain he found it was forsaken by the
troops destined to guard it; and led by a Mahometan, who was a menial
servant to the princes above, he ascended with his troops without
opposition, putting all the royal family that were prisoners, and
indeed every individual of either sex resident there, indiscriminately
to the sword.

The measure of David’s misfortunes seems to have been now full, and he
died accordingly this very year 1540.

It will be necessary here to remind the reader, that Alvarez, the
chaplain and historian of the first Portuguese embassy, was (as he
said) on his return appointed by king David to make his submission
to the pope. Leaving Zaga Zaab, therefore, in Portugal, he proceeded
to Bologna, where the emperor Charles V. was then in person, before
whom and the pope himself he delivered his credentials framed by Peter
Covillan, and afterwards, in a long speech, the reasons of his embassy.

The pope received this submission of David with infinite pleasure,
at a time when so many kingdoms in the west were revolting from his
supremacy. He considered it as a thing of the greatest moment to be
courted before the emperor by so powerful a prince in Africa. But as
for the emperor himself, though he was then preparing for an expedition
against the Mahometans, and though it was his favourite war, he seems
to have been perfectly indifferent either to the embassy itself, or
to the person that sent it; a great proof that he believed there was
nothing real in it.

Many other people have doubted whether this embassy, or that of
John Bermudes, actually came from the Abyssinian court, as the king
would scarcely have abandoned the form of the Alexandrian church in
which he had been brought up by Abuna Mark, then alive. Abuna Mark,
moreover, could scarcely be believed to have promoted embassies which
were intended to strike at the root of his own religion, and the
patriarchal power with which he was endowed.

But to this it is easily answered, That the Abyssinian historian of
David’s reign, through the whole course of it, readily admits his
constant attachment to the see of Rome. He gives a striking example
of it during the war with Gragnè, when the king celebrated Easter
after the manner of the Roman Catholics, though it was to have this
certain effect of dividing his kingdom, and alienating the minds of
his subjects, of whose assistance he was then in the utmost need.
And as for the Abuna, we are to consider that Cairo had been taken,
and the government, which Abuna Mark owned for the lawful one, had
been overturned by the Turks who then possessed it, and were actually
persecuting the Alexandrian church.

The Abuna, then, and the king also, had the same reason for not
applying to Cairo, the seat of the Turks their enemies; and, therefore,
they more readily accommodated matters with a people from whom only
their assistance could come; and without whom, it was probable, that
both the Christian religion and civil government of Abyssinia would
fall together.

It has been said of this king by the European writers who have touched
upon the history of his reign, that he was a prince who had began it in
the most promising manner, but after the death of the empress Helena,
he had abandoned himself to all sort of debauchery, and especially that
of women; insomuch, as Mr Ludolf says, he suffered his concubines to
have idols in his palace. This I take to be a calumny copied from the
Portuguese priests, who never forgave him the denial of his writing
the letters by Matthew, in which it was said he gave the Portuguese,
or rather king of Portugal, one-third of the kingdom; for he succeeded
to the crown at 11 years of age, defeated and slew Maffudi when he
was about sixteen; and, when Don Roderigo and the Portuguese embassy
were with him, he was then something more than twenty, a very devout,
prudent prince, according to the account Alvarez, an eye-witness, gives
of him; and all this time empress Helena was alive.

Again, the very year after the Portuguese embassy left Abyssinia,
that is, in the year 1526, the king was defeated by the Moors, and,
from that time to his death, was hunted about the country like a wild
beast, from rock to rock, very often alone, and at all times slenderly
attended, till he died, in 1540, at the age of 46; so there is no
period during his life in which this calumny can be justly fixed upon
him.

As for the idolatry he is accused of suffering in his palace among his
Pagan mistresses, I cannot recollect any place in the adjoining nations
from which he could have brought these idolatrous rites or mistresses.
The Pagan countries around him profess a remnant of ill-understood
Sabaism, worshipping the stars, the moon, and the wind; but I do not,
as I say, recollect any of these bordering on Abyssinia who worship
idols.

[Illustration]




CLAUDIUS, OR ATZENAF SEGUED.

From 1540 to 1559.

    _Prosperous Beginning of Claudius’s Reign--Christopher de Gama
    lands in Abyssinia--Prevented by the rainy Season from joining
    the King--Battle of Ainal--Battle of Offalo--Christopher
    de Gama slain--Battle of Isaac’s Bet--Moors defeated, and
    their General slain--Abyssinian Army defeated--Claudius
    slain--Remarkable Behaviour of Nur, Governor of Zeyla, General
    of the Moors._


Claudius succeeded his father David III. being yet young, and found the
empire in circumstances that would have required an old and experienced
prince. But, though young, he possessed those graceful and affable
manners which, at first sight, attached people of all sorts to him.
He had been tutored with great care by the empress Helena, was expert
in all warlike exercises, and brave beyond his years.--So say the
Abyssinian annals; and though I have not thought myself warranted to
depart from the letter of the context, yet it is my duty to the reader
to shew him how this could not be.

Claudius was born about the 1522; the empress Helena died in 1525. From
this it is plain, the first three years of his life was all that he
could be under the tutelege of the empress Helena; and, at so early
a period, it is not possible he could receive much advantage. The
princess, to whom he was indebted for his education, was Sabel Wenghel,
celebrated in the Abyssinian history for wisdom and courage equal to
the empress Helena herself. She was relict of David. We shall hereafter
see her called Helena likewise upon another occasion; but the reader is
desired to have in mind, that this confusion of persons is owing only
to that of names to be met with almost in every reign in the Abyssinian
history.

Claudius is said likewise in these annals to have been a child at
the time of his accession; but, having been born in the 1522, and
succeeding to the throne in 1540, he must have been eighteen years of
age; and this cannot be called childhood, especially in Abyssinia,
unless, as I have before said, this observation of age was relative to
the arduous task he had in hand, by succeeding to a kingdom arrived at
the very eve of perdition.

The Moors, notwithstanding the constant success they had against David,
still feared the consequences of his long experience and undaunted
resolution in the most adverse fortune. They were happy, therefore,
in the change of such an enemy, however unfortunate, for a young man
scarcely yet out of the influence of female government, which had
always been favourable to them, and their religion.

A general league was formed without delay among all the Mahometan
chiefs to surround Claudius, and fall upon him before he was in a
situation to defend himself, and by one stroke to put an end to the
war. They accordingly set about collecting troops from all quarters,
but with a degree of inattention and presumption that sufficiently
shewed they thought themselves in no danger. But the young king having
good intelligence that vizir Asa, Osman, Debra Yasous, and Joram,
(who had so nearly taken his father prisoner in the mountain Tsalem)
had their quarters near him, and neglected a good look-out, fell upon
them, without their knowing what his force was, entirely defeated them,
dispersed their army, and struck a panic into the whole confederacy by
the manner this victory was followed up; the king himself on horseback
continued the pursuit all that day and night, as also the next day, and
did not return to his camp till the second evening after his victory,
having slain without mercy every one that had fallen into his hands,
either in the flight, or in the field of battle.

Claudius’s behaviour, on this first occasion, raised the soldiers
confidence to a degree of enthusiasm. Every man that had served under
his father repaired to him with the greatest alacrity. Above all, the
Agows of Lasta came down to him in great troops from their rugged and
inaccessible mountains, the chief of that warlike nation being related
to him by his mother.

The king in person at the head of his army became now an object of
such consideration as to make the Mahometan chiefs no longer retire
as usual to winter in Adel, but canton themselves in the several
districts they had conquered in Abyssinia, and lay aside the thoughts
of farther wasting the country, to defend themselves against so active
and spirited an assailant. They agreed then to join their whole forces
together, and march to force the king to a battle. Osman of Ganzé,
vizir Mudgid who had settled in Amhara, Saber-eddin[35], and all the
lesser rebel officers of Siré and Serawé, effected a junction about
the same time without opposition. Jonathan alone, a rebel of great
experience, had not yet appeared with his troops. The king, on the
other hand, did not seem over anxious to come to an engagement, though
his army was every day ready for battle; and his ground was always
taken with advantage, so that it was almost desperate to pretend to
force him.

Jonathan at last was on his way to join the confederates; but the king
had as early intelligence of his motions as his friends: and, while
he was yet two days march distant from the camp, the king, leaving
his tents standing and his fires lighted, by a forced march in the
night came upon him, (while he thought him blocked up by his rebel
associates at a distance) and, finding Jonathan without preparation or
defence, cut his whole army to pieces, slew him, and then returned to
his own tents as rapidly as he went, having ordered small detachments
to continue in the way between him and his camp, patroling lest some
ambush should be laid for him by the enemy, who, if they had been
informed of his march, though they were too late to prevent the success
of it, might still have attempted to revenge it.

But intelligence was now given to the Moors with much less punctuality
and alacrity than formerly. So generally did the king possess the
affections of the country-people, that no information came to the
confederate army till the next day after his return, when, early in the
morning, he dispatched one of the Moorish prisoners that he had taken
three days before, and spared for the purpose, carrying with him the
head of Jonathan, and a full account of the havock to which he had been
a witness.

This messenger bore also the king’s defiance to the Moors, whom he
challenged, under the odious epithets they deserved, to meet him; and
then actually to shew he was in earnest, marched towards them with his
army, which he formed in order of battle. But tho’ they stood under
arms for a considerable time, whilst several invitations to single
combat were sent from the Christian horsemen, as their custom is,
before they engage, or when their camps are near each other, yet the
Moors were so astonished at what had happened, and what they saw now
before them, that not one officer would advise the risking a battle,
nor any one soldier accept of the challenge offered. The king then
returned to his camp, distributed the whole booty among his soldiers,
and refreshed them, preserving a proper station to cover the wounded,
whom he sent off to places of security.

The king was in the country of Samen in the neighbourhood of Lasta.
He then decamped and passed the river Tacazzé, that he might be
nearer those districts of which the Turks had possessed themselves.
In this march all sorts of people joined the victorious army. Those
that had revolted, and many that had apostatized, came without fear
and surrendered themselves, trusting to the clemency of the prince.
Many of the Moors, natives of Abyssinia, did the same, after having
experienced the difference between the mild Christian government, and
that of their new masters, the Moors and Turks of Adel.

The king encamped at Sard, there to pass his Easter; and, as is usual
in the great festivals, many of the nobility obtained leave to attend
the religious offices of the season at home with their families. Ammer,
governor of Ganzé, who knew the custom of the country, thought this
was the time to surprise the king thinly attended; and it might have
succeeded, if intelligence of the enemy’s designs had not been received
almost as soon as they were formed. Claudius, therefore, drawing
together some of the best of his forces, placed himself in ambush in
Ammer’s, way, who, not suspecting, fell into it with his army, which
was totally destroyed on the 24th of April 1541. After which the king
left his own quarter at Sard and came to Shume.

While things were taking this favourable turn in Abyssinia, the
ambassador, John Bermudes, had passed from Rome to Lisbon, where he
was acknowledged by the king as patriarch of Alexandria, Abyssinia,
and, as he will have it, of the Sea. The first thing he did was to give
the Portuguese a sample of Abyssinian discipline, by putting Zaga Zaab
in irons for having wasted so much time without effecting any of the
purposes of his embassy; but, by the interposition of the king, he was
set at liberty in a few days. Bermudes then fell roundly to the subject
of his embassy, and drew such a picture of the distresses of Abyssinia,
and insisted in his own blunt way so violently with the king of
Portugal, and the nobility in general, that he procured an order from
the king for Don Garcia de Noronha, who was then going out viceroy of
the Indies, to send 400 Portuguese musqueteers from India to the relief
of Abyssinia, and to land them at Masuah.

John Bermudes, to secure the assistance promised, resolved to embark
in the same fleet with Don Garcia; but he fell sick, from poison given
him, as he apprehends, by Zaga Zaab, and this delayed his embarkation a
year. The next year, being recovered of his illness, he arrived safely
at India. In the interim Don Garcia died, and Don Stephen de Gama, who
succeeded him, did not embrace the scheme of the intended succour with
such eagerness as Bermudes could have wished.

After some delay, however, it was resolved that Don Stephen should
himself undertake an expedition from India, to burn the Turkish gallies
that were at Suez. In this, however, Don Stephen was disappointed.
Upon intelligence of the intended visit, the Turkish gallies had been
all drawn ashore. He came after this to the port of Masuah, where
the fleet intended to water; and, for that purpose, their boats were
sent to Arkeeko, a small town and fortress upon the main-land, where
good water may be found. But the Moors and Turks from Zeyla and Adel
were now masters there, who took the 1000 webs of cotton-cloth the
captain had sent to exchange for water and provisions, and sent him
word back, that his master, the king of Adel, was now king of all
Ethiopia, and would not suffer any further trade to be carried on, but
through his subjects; if, therefore, the captain of the fleet would
make peace with him, he should restore the cotton-webs which had been
taken, supply him plentifully with provisions, and make amends for the
sixty Portuguese slain on the coast near Zeyla: For, upon the fleet’s
entering the Red Sea, this number of Portuguese had run away with a
boat; and, landing in the kingdom of Adel, where they could procure
no water, they were decoyed to give up their arms, and were then all
massacred.

The captain, Don Stephen, saw the trap laid for him by the Moors, and,
resolving to pay them in their own coin, he returned this answer to
their message, “That he was very willing to trade with the Moorish
officer, but did not demand restitution of the clothes, as they were
taken in fair war. As for the sixty Portuguese, they had met the death
they deserved, as being traitors and deserters: That he now sent a
thousand more clothes, desiring water and provisions, especially live
cattle; and that, as it was now the time of their festival, he would
treat with them for peace, and bring his goods ashore as soon as the
holidays were over.”

This being agreed to on both sides, with equal bad faith and intention
towards each other, and Don Stephen having obtained his refreshments,
he strictly forbade any further communication with the shore. He then
selected a body of six hundred men, the command of whom he gave to
Martin Correa, who, in light boats, without shewing any fire, landed
undiscovered below Arkeeko, and took possession of the entrances to
the town, putting all that they met to the sword. Nur, governor of
the province for the king of Adel, fled as soon as he had heard the
Portuguese were in the town: He was already in the fields, when Martin
Correa shot him with a musquet, and cut off his head, which was
sent before them to the queen, Sabel Wenghel, then in a strong-hold
of the province of Tigré, and with her Degdeasmati (which, in common
discourse, is called _Kasmati_) Robel. This was the person of that name
who had met Don Roderigo in his journey to find the king, and who was
now governor of the province. The queen received the Moorish general’s
head with great demonstrations of joy, considering it as an early
pledge of future victories.

In the mean time, Don Stephen de Gama, captain of the fleet, began to
inrol the men destined to march to join Claudius. Four hundred and
fifty musqueteers was the number granted by the king to Bermudes; but
an ardent desire of glory had seized all the Portuguese, and every
one strove to be in the nomination for that enterprise. All that Don
Stephen could do was to choose men of the first rank for the officers;
and these, of necessity, having many servants whom they carried with
them, greatly, by this means, encreased the number beyond the 450. Don
Christopher de Gama, Don Stephen’s youngest brother, a nobleman of
great hopes, was chosen to command this small army of heroes.

A very great murmuring, nevertheless, prevailed among those that
were refused, which was scarcely kept in due bounds by the presence
and authority of the governor Don Stephen himself. And from this
honourable emulation, and the discontent these brave soldiers who were
left behind shewed, the bay where the galley rode in the harbour of
Masuah, on board which this council was held, is called to this day
_Bahia dos Agravados_, the Bay of Wronged, or Injured People, sometimes
misinterpreted the Bay _of the Sick_.

The army under Don Christopher marched to Arkeeko, where the next day
came the governor Don Stephen, and the principal officers of the fleet,
and took leave of their countrymen; and, after receiving the blessing
of Don John Bermudes, _Patriarch of the Sea_, the governor and rest of
the Portuguese embarked, and returned to India.

Don Christopher, with the greatest intrepidity, began his march towards
Dobarwa, the easiest entrance into Abyssinia, though still over rugged
and almost inaccessible mountains. The Baharnagash had orders to attend
him, and furnish this little army with cattle both for their provision
and carriages; and this he actually performed. But the carriages of the
small train of artillery giving way in this bad road, and there being
nobody at hand to assist them with fresh ones in case the old failed,
Gama made certain carriages of wood after the pattern of those they
had brought from Portugal; and, as iron was a very scarce commodity in
Abyssinia, he made them split in pieces some barrels of old and useless
firelocks for the wheels with which they were to draw their artillery.

The queen, without delay, came forward to join Don Christopher;
who, hearing she was at hand, went to meet her a league from the
city with drums beating and colours flying, and saluted her with a
general discharge of fire-arms, which terrified her much. Her two
sisters accompanied her, and a number of attendants of both sexes. Don
Christopher, at the head of his soldiers, paid his compliments with
equal gallantry and respect. The queen was covered from head to foot,
but lifted up her veil, so that her face could be seen by him; and he,
on the other hand, appointed a hundred musqueteers for her guard; and
thus they returned to Dobarwa mutually satisfied with this their first
interview.

Don Christopher marched from Dobarwa eight days through a very rugged
country, endeavouring, if possible, to bring about a junction with the
king. And it was in this place, while he was encamped, that he received
a message from the Moorish general, full of opprobrious expressions,
which was answered in much the same manner. Don Christopher continued
his march as much as he could on account of the rains; and Gragnè,
whose greatest desire was to prevent the junction, followed him into
Tigré. Neither army desired to avoid the other, and they were both
marching to the same point; so that on the 25th of March 1542, they
came in sight of each other at Ainal, a small village in the country of
the Baharnagash.

The Moorish army consisted of 1000 horsemen, 5000 foot, 50 Turkish
musqueteers, and a few pieces of artillery. Don Christopher, besides
his 450 musqueteers, had about 12,000 Abyssinians, mostly foot, with
a few bad horse commanded by the Baharnagash, and Robel governor of
Tigré. Don Christopher, whose principal view was a junction with the
king, though he did not decline fighting, yet, like a good officer, he
chose to do it as much as possible upon his own terms; and, therefore,
as the enemy exceeded greatly in the number of horse, he posted himself
so as to make the best of his fire-arms and artillery. And well it was
that he did so, for the Abyssinians shewed the utmost terror when the
firing began on both sides.

Gragne, mounted on a bay horse, advancing too near Don Christopher’s
line that he might see if in any part it was accessible to his cavalry,
and being known by his dress to be an officer of distinction, he was
shot at by Peter de Sa, a Portuguese marksman, who killed his horse,
and wounded the rider in the leg. This occasioned a great confusion,
and would probably have ended in a defeat of the Moors, had not the
Portuguese general also been wounded immediately after by a shot.
Don Christopher, to shew his confidence of victory, ordered his men
forthwith to pitch their tents, upon which the Moors retired with
Gragnè (whom they had mounted on another horse) without being pursued,
the Abyssinians having contented themselves with being spectators of
the battle.

Don Christopher, with his army and the empress, now entered into
winter-quarters at Affalo; nor did Gragnè depart to any distance from
him, but took up his quarters at Zabul, in hopes always to fight the
Portuguese before it was possible for them to effect a junction with
the king. The winter passed in a mutual intercourse of correspondence
and confidence between the king and Don Christopher, and in determining
upon the best scheme to pursue the war with success. Don Christopher
and the queen were both of opinion, that, considering the small number
of Portuguese first landed, and their diminution by fighting, and a
strange climate, it was risking every thing to defer a junction till
the winter was over.

The Moorish general was perfectly of the same opinion; therefore,
as soon as the king began his march from Dembea, Gragnè advanced to
Don Christopher’s camp, and placed himself between the Portuguese
army and that of the king, drawing up his troops before the camp, and
defying the Portuguese to march out, and fight, in the most opprobrious
language. Don Christopher, in a long catalogue of virtues which he
possessed to a very eminent degree, had not the smallest claim to
that of patience, so very necessary to those that command armies. He
was brave to a fault; rash and vehement; jealous of what he thought
military honour; and obstinate in his resolutions, which he formed in
consequence. The defiance of this barbarian, at which an old general
would have laughed, made him utterly forget the reasons he himself
frequently alledged, and the arguments used by the queen, which the
king’s approach daily strengthened, that it was risking every thing to
come to a battle till the two armies had joined. He had, however, from
no other motive but Gragnè’s insolence, formed his resolution to fight,
without waiting a junction; and accordingly the 30th of August, early
in the morning, having chosen his ground to the best advantage, he
offered battle to the Moorish army.

Gragne, by presents sent to the basha of Zibid, had doubled his number
of horse, which now consisted of 2000. He had got likewise 100 Turkish
musqueteers, an infinite number of foot, and a train of artillery more
numerous and complete than ever had been seen before in Abyssinia. The
queen, frightened at the preparation for the battle, fled, taking with
her the Portuguese patriarch, who seemed to have as little inclination
as she had to see the issue of the day. But Don Christopher, who knew
well the bad effects this example would have, both on Abyssinians and
Portuguese, sent twenty horse, and brought them both back; telling
the patriarch it was a breach of duty he would not suffer, for him
to withdraw until he had confessed him, and given the army absolution
before the action with the Infidels.

The battle was fought on the 30th of August with great fury and
obstinacy on both sides. The Portuguese had strewed, early in the
morning, all the front of their line with gun-powder, to which, on
the approach of the Turks, they set fire by trains, which burnt
and disabled, a great many of them; and things bore a prosperous
appearance, till the Moorish general ordered some artillery to be
pointed against the Abyssinians, who, upon hearing the first explosion,
and seeing the effect of some balls that had lighted among them, fled,
and left the Portuguese to the number only of 400, who were immediately
surrounded by the Moorish army. Nor did Gragnè pursue the fugitives,
his affair being with the Portuguese, the smallness of whose number
promised they would fall an easy and certain sacrifice. He therefore,
attacked their camp upon every side with very little success, having
lost most of his best officers, till, unfortunately, Don Christopher,
fighting and exposing himself everywhere, was singled out by a Turkish
soldier, and shot through the arm. Upon this all his men turned their
thoughts from their own preservation to that of their general, who
obstinately refused to fly, till he was by force put upon a litter, and
sent off, together with the patriarch and queen.

Night now coming on, Don Christopher had got into a wood in which there
was a cave. There he ordered himself to be set down to have his wounds
dressed; which, being done, he was urged by the queen and patriarch to
continue his flight. But he had formed his resolution, and, without
deigning to give his reasons, he obstinately refused to retreat a step
farther. In vain the queen, and those that knew the country, told him
he was just in the tract of the Moorish horsemen, who would not fail
soon to surround him. He repeated his resolution of staying there
with such a degree of firmness, that the queen and patriarch, who had
no great desire for martyrdom, left him to his fate, which presently
overtook him.

In one of Don Christopher’s expeditions to the mountains, he had taken
a very beautiful woman, wife to a Turkish officer, whom he had slain.
This lady had made a shew of conversion to Christianity; lived with him
afterwards, and was treated by him with the utmost tenderness. It was
said, that, after he was wounded and began to fly, this woman had given
him his route, and promised to overtake him with friends that would
carry him to a place of safety. Accordingly, some servants left by
the queen, hidden among the rocks, to watch what might befal him, and
assist him if possible, saw a woman, in the dawn of the morning, come
to the cave, and return into the wood immediately, whence there rushed
out a body of Moorish horse, who went straight to the cave and found
Don Christopher lying upon the ground sorely wounded. Upon the first
question that was asked him, he declared his name, which so overjoyed
the Moors, that they gave over further pursuit, and returned with the
prisoner they had taken. Don Christopher was brought into the presence
of the Moorish general, Gragnè, who loaded him with reproaches; to
which he replied with such a share of invectives, that the Moor, in the
violence of his passion, drew his sword and cut off his head with his
own hand. His head was sent to Constantinople, and parts of his body to
Zibid and other quarters of Arabia.

The Portuguese camp was now taken, and all the wounded found in it
were put to death. The women, from their fear, having retired all into
Don Christopher’s tent, the Turks began to indulge themselves in their
usual excesses towards their captives, when a noble Abyssinian woman,
who had been married to a Portuguese, seeing the shocking treatment
that was awaiting them, set fire to several barrels of gun-powder that
were in the tent, and at once destroyed herself, her companions, and
those that were about to abuse them.

The queen and the patriarch, after travelling through most difficult
ways, and being hospitably entertained whereever they passed, at last
took up their residence in the Jews mountain, a place inaccessible in
point of strength, having but one entrance, and that very difficult,
being also defended by a multitude of inhabitants who dwell on a large
plain on the top of that mountain, where there is plenty of space to
plow and sow, and a large stream of water that runs through the whole
of it. Here they staid two months, as well to repose themselves as
to give the king time to relieve them. After hearing that he was in
motion, they left the mountain of the Jews, and met him on his march
towards them.

Claudius shewed great signs of sorrow for the death of Don Christopher,
and mourned three days. He then sent 3000 ounces of gold to be divided
among the Portuguese, who, in the place of Don Christopher, had elected
Alphonso Caldeyra for their captain. These all flocked about the king,
demanding that he would lead them to battle, that they might revenge
the death of Don Christopher. Soon after which, Alphonso Caldeyra,
exercising a horse in the field, was thrown off and died of the fall.
In his place was elected Arius Dias, a Portuguese, born at Coimbra,
whose mother was a black; he was very much favoured by the king, who
now began to cultivate particular parties among the Portuguese, in
order to divide them, and loosen their attachment for their patriarch,
religion, and country.

The king marched from Samen to Shawada, where the Moorish army came
in full force to meet him. They were not, however, those formidable
troops that had defeated and taken Don Christopher: For the Turkish
soldiers, who were the strength of the army, expecting to have shared
a great sum each for Don Christopher’s ransom, thought themselves
exceedingly injured by the manner in which he was put to death; and
they had accordingly all to a man returned into Arabia, leaving Gragnè
to fight his own battles for his own profit. Nor was Claudius ignorant
of this; and having collected all his army he gave the Moors battle on
the 15th of November in a plain called Woggora, on the top of Lamalmon,
in which the Moors, notwithstanding their recent victory, were not long
in yielding to the superiority of the king’s troops.

The loss of the day was not inconsiderable. Mahomet, Osman, and Talil,
three Moorish leaders, famous for their successes against David the
king’s father, were this day slain in the field.

Claudius now descended into the low country of Derseguè, a very
plentiful province, to which the Moors always retreated to strengthen
themselves after any misfortune. This the king utterly destroyed;
while Gragnè did the same with those countries in Dembea that had been
recovered by the king. Claudius then returned to Shawada, and Gragnè to
Derseguè. After that the king marched to Wainadega, and Gragnè, leaving
Derseguè, advanced so near the king’s army, that the outposts were
nearly in sight of each other. In such a position of two such armies a
battle became inevitable.

Accordingly, on the 10th of Feb. 1543, in the morning, the king, whose
quarters were at Isaac’s Bet, having well refreshed his army, marched
out of his camp, and offered the enemy battle. The Portuguese, ever
mindful of Don Christopher, fought with a bravery like to desperation,
and the presence of the king keeping the Abyssinians in their duty,
the van of Gragnè’s army was pushed back upon the center, and much
confusion was like to follow, till Gragnè advanced alone before them,
waving and beckoning with his hands to his men that they should follow;
and he was already come so near the Portuguese line as to be easily
known and distinguished by them.

Peter Lyon, a man of low stature, but very active and valiant, who had
been valet-de-chambre to Don Christopher, having crept unseen along
the course of a river a considerable space nearer, to make his aim
more certain, shot Gragnè with his musquet, so that the ball went
through his body in the moment that both armies joined. Gragnè, finding
that his wound was mortal, rode aside from the pressure of the troops
towards a small thicket, and was closely followed by Peter Lyon, who
saw him fall dead from his horse; and, desirous still to do further
service in the battle, he would not incumber himself with his head,
but, cutting off one of the ears, he put it in his pocket, and returned
to the action. The Moorish army no sooner missed the presence of their
general, than concluding all lost, they fell into confusion, and were
pursued by the Portuguese and Abyssinians, with a great slaughter, till
the evening.

The next morning, in surveying the dead, the body of Gragnè was found
by an Abyssinian officer, who cut his head off, and brought it to the
king, who received him with great honour and promise of reward. Peter
Lyon stood a silent spectator of the impudence of his competitor; but
Arius Dias, who knew the fact, desired the king’s attention; saying, at
the same time, “That he believed his majesty knew Gragnè well enough to
suppose that he would not suffer any man to cut off his ear, without
having it in his power to sever his head also; and consequently, that
the ear must be in possession of a better man than he that had brought
his head to the camp.” Upon this, Peter Lyon pulled the ear out of his
pocket, and laid it at the king’s feet, amidst the acclamations of all
present, for his bravery in revenging his old master’s death, and his
modesty in being content with having done so, without pretending to any
other reward.

In this battle, a son of Gragnè was taken prisoner, with many other
considerable officers; and Del Wumbarea, wife of Gragnè, with Nur son
of Mudgid, and a few troops, were obliged to throw themselves, for
safety, among the wilds and woods of Atbara, thereby escaping with
great difficulty.

The king had now ample revenge of all the Moorish leaders who had
reduced his father to such extremities, excepting Joram, who had driven
the king from his hiding-place on mount Tsalem, and forced him to cross
the Tacazzé on foot, with equal danger of being drowned or taken. This
leader had, much against his will, been detained from the last battle,
but, hoping to be still in time, was advancing by forced marches. The
king, informed of his route, detached a party of his army to meet him
before the news of the battle could reach him. They having placed them
selves in ambush, he fell into it with his army, and was cut to pieces:
this completed Claudius’s account with his father’s enemies.

During the late war with Gragnè, the provinces of Tigré and Siré had
been the principal seat of the war. They were immediately in the way
between Dembea, Masuah, and the other Moorish posts upon the Red Sea;
the enemy had crossed them in all directions, and a proportionable
devastation had been the consequence. Gragnè had burnt Axum, and
destroyed all the churches and convents in Tigré. The king, now
delivered from this enemy, had applied seriously to repair the ravages
which had been made in the country. For this purpose he marched with a
small army towards Axum, intending afterwards an expedition against the
Galla.

It was in the 13th year of the reign of Claudius, while he was at
Siré, that there happened a very remarkable eclipse of the sun, which
threw both court and army into great consternation. The prophets and
diviners, ignorant monks of the desert, did not let slip so favourable
an opportunity of increasing their consequence by augmenting this
panic, and declaring this eclipse to portend nothing less than the
renewal of the Moorish war. The year, however, passed in tranquillity
and peace. Two old women, relations of the king, are said to have died;
and it was in this great calamity that these diviners were to look for
the completion of their prophecies. It is from this, however, that
I have taken an opportunity to compare and rectify the dates of the
principal transactions in the Abyssinian history. Siré, where the king
then resided, was a point very favourable for this application; for,
in my journey from Masuah to Gondar, I had settled the latitude and
longitude of that town by many observations.

On the 22d of January 1770, at night, by a medium of different passages
of stars over the meridian, and by an observation of the sun the noon
of the following day, I found the latitude to be 14° 4´ 35´´ north, and
the evening of the 23d, I observed an emersion of the first satellite
of Jupiter, and by this I concluded the longitude of Siré to be 38° 0´
15´´ east of the meridian of Greenwich.

The 13th year of the reign of Claudius falls to be in the 1553, and I
find that there was a remarkable eclipse of the sun that did happen
that same year on the 24th of January N. S. which answers to the 18th
of the Ethiopic month Teir. The circumstances of this eclipse were as
follow:

                _H._   _M._   _S._
  Beginning,     7      21     0 A. M.
  Middle,        8      40     0
  End           10       1     0

The quantity of the sun’s disk obscured was 10 digits; so that this
was so near to a total eclipse, it must have made an impression on
the spectators minds that sufficiently accounts for the alarm and
apprehensions it occasioned.

In the month of January, nothing can be more beautiful than the sky in
Siré; not a cloud appears; the sky is all of a pale azure, the colour
lighter than an European sky, and of inexpressible beauty. The manner
of applying this eclipse I shall mention hereafter.

Eclipses of the moon do not seem to be attended to in Abyssinia. The
people are very little out in the night, insomuch that I do not find
one of these recorded throughout their history. The circumstances of
the season make even those of the sun seldomer visible than in other
climates, for in the rainy season, from April to September, the heavens
are constantly overcast with clouds, so that it is mere accident if
they can catch the moment it happens. But in the month of Teir, that
is December and January, the sky is perfectly serene and clear, and at
this time our eclipse above mentioned happened.

The king now took into his consideration the state of the church. He
had sent for an Abuna from Cairo to succeed Abuna Marcus, and he was
now in his way to Abyssinia, while Bermudes, not able to bear this
slight, on the other hand, publicly declared to the king, that, having
been ambassador from his father, and made his submission to the Roman
pontiff, for himself and for his kingdom, he now expected that Claudius
would make good his father’s engagements, embrace the Roman Catholic
religion himself, and, without delay, proclaim it as the established
religion in Abyssinia. This the king positively refused to do, and
a conversation ensued, which is repeated by Bermudes himself, and
sufficiently shews the moderation of the young king, and the fiery,
brutal zeal of that ignorant, bigotted, ill-mannered priest. Hitherto
the Abyssinians heard the Portuguese mass with reverence and attention;
and the Portuguese frequented the Abyssinian churches with complacency.
They intermarried with each other, and the children seem to have been
christened indifferently by the priests of either church. And this
might have long continued, had it not been for the impatience of
Bermudes.

The king, seeing the danger of connecting himself with such a man,
kept up every appearance of attachment to the Alexandrian church. Yet,
says the Abyssinian historian who writes his life, it was well known
that Claudius, in his heart, was a private, but perfect convert, to
the Romish faith, and kept only from embracing it by his hatred to
Bermudes, the constant persuasion of the empress Sabel Wenghel, and
the recollection of the misfortunes of his father. Upon being required
publicly to submit himself to the See of Rome, he declared that he had
made no such promise; that he considered Bermudes as no patriarch,
or, at best, only patriarch of the Franks; and that the Abuna of
Abyssinia was the chief priest acknowledged by him. Bermudes told him,
that he was accursed and excommunicated. Claudius answered, that he,
Bermudes, was a nestorian heretic, and worshipped four gods. Bermudes
answered plainly, that he lied; that he would take every Portuguese
from him, and return to India whence he came. The king’s answer was,
that he wished he would return to India; but as for the Portuguese,
neither they, nor any other person, should leave his kingdom without
his permission. Accordingly, having perfectly gained Arius Dias, he
gave him the name of Marcus, with the command of the Portuguese, and
sent him a standard with his own arms, to use instead of the king of
Portugal’s. But the Abyssinian page being met, on his return, with the
Portuguese standard in his hand, by James Brito, he wrested it from
him, felling him to the ground with a blow of his sword on the head.

From expostulations with the king, the matter of religion turned into
disputes among the priests, at which the king always assisted in
person. If we suppose they were no better sustained on the part of
the Abyssinians than they were by the patriarch Bermudes, who we know
was no great divine, we cannot expect much that was edifying from the
arguments that either of them used. The Portuguese priests say[36],
that the king, struck with the ignorance of his own clergy, frequently
took the discussion upon himself, which he managed with such force
of reasoning as often to put the patriarch to a stand. From verbal
disputes, which terminated in nothing, Bermudes was resolved to appeal
to arguments in writing; and, with the help of those that were with
him of the same faith, a fair state of the differences in question was
made in a small book, and presented to the king, who read it with so
much pleasure that he kept it constantly by him. This gave very great
offence to the Abyssinian clergy; and the Abuna being now arrived,
the king desired of him liberty to read that book, which he refusing,
put the young king into so violent a passion that he called the Abuna
Mahometan and Infidel to his face.

Things growing worse and worse between the Portuguese and Abyssinians,
by the incendiary spirit of the brutish Bermudes, from reproaches they
came to blows; and this proceeded so far, that the Portuguese one night
assaulted the king’s tent, where they slew some, and grievously wounded
others. Upon this, the king, desirous to estrange him a little from the
Portuguese, sent Bermudes to the country of the Gafats, where he gave
him large appointments, in hopes that the natural turbulence of his
temper would involve him in some difficulties. And there he staid seven
months, oppressing the poor ignorant people, and frightening them with
the noise of his fire-arms. During this period, the king went on an
expedition against the Galla; Bermudes then returned to court, where he
found that Arius Dias was dead, and a great many of the Portuguese very
well attached to the king. But he began his old work of dissention,
insomuch that the king determined to banish him to a mountain for life.

Gaspar de Suza now commanded the Portuguese instead of Arius Dias, a
man equally beloved by his own nation and the king. By his persuasions,
and that of Kasmati Robel, the banishment to the mountain was laid
aside; but Bermudes was privately persuaded to embark for India while
it was yet time; and accordingly he repaired to Dobarwa, where he
remained two years, as it should seem, perfectly quiet, neglected, and
forlorn; saying daily mass to ten Portuguese who had settled in that
town after the defeat of Don Christopher. He then went to Masuah, and
the monsoon being favourable, he embarked on board a Portuguese vessel,
carrying with him the ten Portuguese that were settled at Dobarwa, who
all arrived safely at Goa.

St Ignatius, founder of the Order of Jesuits, was then at Rome in
the dawn of his holiness. The conversion of Abyssinia seemed of such
consequence to him, that he resolved himself to go and be the apostle
of the kingdom. But the pope, who had conceived other hopes of him and
his Order more important and nearer at hand, absolutely refused this
offer. One of his society, Nugnez Baretto, was, however, fixed upon
for patriarch, without any notice being taken of Don John Bermudes. By
him Ignatius sent a letter addressed to Claudius, which is to be found
in the collections[37]. It does not, I think, give us any idea of the
ingenuity or invention of that great saint. It seems mostly to beg the
question, and to contain little else than texts of scripture for his
future missionaries to preach and write on, relative to the difference
of tenets of the two churches.

With this letter, and a number of priests, Baretto came to Goa. But
news being arrived there of king Claudius’s steady aversion to the
Catholic church, it was then thought better, rather than risk the
patriarchal dignity, to send Andrew Oviedo bishop of Hierapolis,
and Melchior Carneyro bishop of Nice, with several other priests,
as ambassadors from the governor of India to Claudius, with proper
credentials. They arrived safely at Masuah in 1558, five days before
the Turkish basha came with his fleet and army, and took possession of
Masuah and Arkeeko, though these places had been occupied by the Turks
two years before.

When the arrival of these Portuguese was intimated to Claudius, he was
exceedingly glad, as he considered them as an accession of strength.
But when, on opening the letter, he saw they were priests, he was
very much troubled, and said, that he wondered the king of Portugal
should meddle so much with his affairs; that he and his predecessors
knew no obedience due but to the chair of St Mark, or acknowledged
any other patriarch but that of Alexandria; nevertheless, continued
he with his usual goodness and moderation, since they are come so
far out of an honest concern for me, I shall not fail to send proper
persons to receive and conduct them. This he did, and the two bishops
and their companions were immediately brought to court. It was at this
time that the dispute about the two natures began, in which the king
took so considerable a part. He was strenuous, eloquent, and vehement
in the discussion; when that was ended, he still preserved his usual
moderation and kindness for the Portuguese priests.

Nugnez died in India, and Oviedo succeeded him as patriarch to
Abyssinia, it having been so appointed by the pope from the beginning
of their mission.

Claudius had no children; a treaty was therefore set on foot, at the
instance of the empress Sabel Wenghel, for ransoming the prince Menas
who had been taken prisoner in his father David’s time, and ever since
kept in confinement among the Moors, upon a high mountain in Adel.
The same had happened to a son of Gragnè likewise, made prisoner at
the battle of Wainadega, when his father was slain by Claudius. The
Moors settled in Abyssinia, as well as all the Abyssinian rebels who
had forsaken their allegiance or religion during the war, were to a man
violently against setting Menas at liberty, for he was the only brother
Claudius had, and a disputed succession was otherwise probable, which
was what the Moors longed for. Besides this, Menas was exceedingly
brave, of a severe and cruel temper, a mortal enemy to the Mahometans,
and at this time in the flower of his age, and perfectly fit to govern.
It was not, then, by any means, an eligible measure for those who were
naturally the objects of his hatred, to provide such an assistant and
successor to Claudius.

Del Wumbarea thought, that, having lost her husband, to be deprived of
her son likewise, was more than fell to her share in the common cause.
She, too, had therefore applied to the basha of Masuah, who looked no
farther than to a ransom, and cared very little what prince reigned in
Abyssinia. He, therefore, undertook the management of the matter, and
declared that he would send Menas to the Grand Signior, as soon as an
answer should come from Constantinople, while Claudius protested, that
he would give up Gragnè’s son to the Portuguese, if the ransom for his
brother was not immediately agreed on. This resolution, on both sides,
quickly removed all objections. Four thousand ounces of gold were
paid to the Moors and the basha; Menas was released and sent home to
Claudius, who thereupon, in his turn, set Ali Gerad, son of Gragnè by
Del Wumbarea, at liberty, and with him Waraba Guta brother of the king
of Adel, and this finished the transaction.

I must here observe, that what Bermudes[38] says, that Del Wumbarea was
taken prisoner and given in marriage to Arius Dias, was but a fable,
as appears both from the beginning and sequel of the narrative. Del
Wumbarea having thus obtained her son, took a very early opportunity
of shewing she had not yet forgot the father. Nur, governor of Zeyla,
son of Mudgid, who had slain the princes imprisoned upon the mountain
of Geshen, was deeply in love with this lady, and had deserved well
of her, for he had assisted her in making her escape into Atbara that
day her husband was slain. But this heroine had constantly refused
to listen to any proposals; nay, had vowed she never would give her
hand in marriage to any man till he should first bring her the head
of Claudius who had slain her husband. Nur willingly accepted the
condition, which gave him few rivals, but rather seemed to be reserved
for him, and out of the power of every one else.

Claudius, before this, had marched towards Adel, when he received a
message from Nur, that, though Gragnè was dead, there still remained a
governor of Zeyla, whose family was chosen as a particular instrument
for shedding the blood of the Abyssinian princes; and desired him,
therefore, to be prepared, for he was speedily to set out to come to
him. Claudius had been employed in various journies through different
parts of his kingdom, repairing the churches which Gragnè and the other
Moors had burnt; and he was then rebuilding that of Debra Werk[39]
when this message of Nur was brought to him. This prince was of a
temper never to avoid a challenge; and if he did not march against Nur
immediately, he staid no longer than to complete his army as far as
possible. He then began his march for Adel, very much, as it is said,
against the advice of his friends.

That such advice should be given, at this particular time, appears
strange; for till now he had been constantly victorious, and his
kingdom was perfectly obedient, which was not the case when any one of
the former battles had been fought. But many prophecies were current
in the camp, that the king was to be unfortunate this campaign, and
was to lose his life in it. These unfortunate rumours tended much
to discourage the army, at the same time that they seemed to have a
contrary effect on the king, and to confirm him in his resolution to
fight. The truth is, the clergy, who had seen the country delivered
by him from the Mahometans in a manner almost miraculous, and the
constancy with which he withstood the Romish patriarch, and frustrated
the designs of his father against the Alexandrian church, and who had
experienced his extreme liberality in rebuilding the churches, had
wrought his young mind to such a degree of enthusiasm that he was
often heard to say, he preferred a death in the middle of an army of
Infidels to the longest and most prosperous life that ever fell to the
lot of man. It needed not a prophet to have foretold the likely issue
of a battle in these circumstances, where the king, careless of life,
rather sought death than victory; where the number of Portuguese was so
small as to be incapable, of themselves, to effect any thing; where,
even of that number, those that were attached to the king were looked
upon as traitors by those of the party of the patriarch; and where the
Abyssinians, from their repeated quarrels and disputes, heartily hated
them all.

The armies were drawn up and ready to engage, when the chief priest of
Debra Libanos came to the king to tell him a dream, or vision, which
warned him not to fight; but the Moors were then advancing, and the
king on horseback made no reply, but marched briskly forward to the
enemy. The cowardly Abyssinians, upon the first fire, fled, leaving the
king engaged in the middle of the Moorish army with twenty horse and
eighteen Portuguese musqueteers, who were all slain around his person;
and he himself fell, after fighting manfully, and receiving twenty
wounds. His head was cut off, and by Nur delivered to Del Wumbarea,
who directed it to be tied by the hair to the branch of a tree before
her door, that she might keep it constantly in sight. Here it remained
three years, till it was purchased from her by an Armenian merchant,
her first grief, having, it is probable, subsided upon the acquisition
of a new husband. The merchant carried the head to Antioch, and buried
it there in the sepulchre of a saint of the same name.

Thus died king Claudius in the 19th year of his reign, who, by his
virtues and capacity, might hold a first place among any series of
kings we have known, victorious in every action he fought, except
in that one only in which he died. A great slaughter was made after
this among the routed, and many of the first nobility were slain in
endeavouring to escape; among the rest, the dreamer from Debra Libanos,
his vision, by which he knew the king’s death, not having extended so
far as to reveal his own. The Abyssinians immediately transferred the
name of this prince into their catalogue of Saints, and he is called St
Claudius in that country to this day. Though endowed with every other
virtue that entitled him to his place in the kalendar, he seems to have
wanted one--that of dying in charity with his enemies.

This battle was fought on the 22d March 1559; and the victory gained
by Nur was a complete one. The king and most of his principal officers
were slain; great part of the army taken prisoners, the rest dispersed,
and the camp plundered; so that no Moorish general had ever returned
home with the glory that he did. But afterwards, in his behaviour, he
exhibited a spectacle more memorable, and that did him more honour
than the victory itself; for, when he drew near to Adel, he clothed
himself in poor attire like a common soldier, and bare-headed, mounted
on an ordinary mule, with an old saddle and tattered accoutrements, he
forbade the songs and praise with which it is usual to meet conquerors
in that country when returning with victory from the field. He declined
also all share in the success of that day, declaring that the whole of
it was due to God alone, to whose mercy and immediate interposition he
owed the destruction of the Christian army.

The unworthy and unfortunate John Bermudes having arrived in Portugal
from India, continued there till his death; and, in the inscription
over his tomb, is called only _Patriarch of Alexandria_. Yet it is
clear, from the history of these times, that he was first ordained by
the old patriarch Marcus; and that the pope, Paul III. only confirmed
the ordination of this heretical schismatical prelate, though we
have stated that he was ordained by the pope, according to his own
assertion, to be patriarch of Alexandria, Abyssinia, and the Sea.
Bermudes lived many years after this, and never resigned any of his
charges.

However, on his arrival in Europe, several supposed well-meaning
persons at Rome began to discourse among themselves, as if the
conversion of Abyssinia had not had a fair trial when trusted in the
hands of such a man as Bermudes. Scandalous stories as to his moral
character were propagated at Rome to strengthen this. He was said to
have stolen a golden cup in Abyssinia[40]; but this does not appear
to me in any shape probable, or like the manners of the man. He was
a simple, ill-bred zealot, exceedingly vain, but in no-wise coveting
riches or gain of any sort. Sebastian king of Portugal, hearing the
bad posture of the Catholic religion in Abyssinia, and the small hopes
of the conversion of that country, besought the pope to send all the
missionaries that were in that kingdom to preach the gospel in Japan:
but Oviedo stated such strong reasons in his letter to Rome, that he
was confirmed in the mission of Ethiopia.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




MENAS, or ADAMAS SEGUED.

From 1559 to 1563.

    _Baharnagash rebels, proclaims Tascar King--Defeated by the
    King--Cedes Dobarwa to the Turks, and makes a League with the
    Basha of Masuah._


MENAS succeeded his brother Claudius, and found his kingdom in almost
as great confusion as it had been left by his father David. His first
campaign was against Radaet the Jew. The king attacked him at his
strongest post in Samen, where he fought him with various success; and
the enterprise did not seem much advanced, when a hermit, residing
in these mountains, probably tired with the neighbourhood of such
troublesome people, came and told the king, it had been revealed to him
that the conquest of the Jews was not allotted to him, nor was their
time yet come.

While the king seemed disposed to avail himself of the hermit’s
warning, as a decent excuse to get rid of an affair that did not
succeed to his mind, an accident happened which determined him to quit
his present undertaking. Two men, shepherds of Ebenaat in Belessen,
from what injury is not known, engaged two of the king’s servants,
who were their relations, to introduce them into Menas’s tent while
sleeping, with a design to murder him in his bed. While they were
preparing to execute their intention, one of them stumbled over the
lamp that was burning, and threw it down. The king awakening, and
challenging him with a loud voice, the assassin struck at him with his
knife, but so feebly, from the fright, that he dropt the weapon upon
the king’s cloak without hurting him. They sled immediately out of
the tent, but were taken at Ebenaat the next day, and brought back to
the king, who gave orders to the judges to try them: they were both
condemned, the one to be thrust through with lances, the other to be
stoned to death; after which, both their bodies were thrown to the dogs
and to the beasts of the field, as is practised constantly in all cases
of high-treason.

The second year of the reign of Menas was ushered in by a conspiracy
among the principal men of his court, at the head of which was Isaac
Baharnagash, an old and tried servant of his brother Claudius. This
officer had been treated ill by Menas in the beginning of his reign;
and, knowing the prince’s violent and cruel disposition, he could not
persuade himself that he was yet in safety.

Menas, to suppress this rebellion in its infancy, sent Zara Johannes,
an old officer, before him, with what forces he could collect in
the instant; but Isaac, informed of the bad state of that army, and
consequently of his own superiority, left him no time to strengthen
himself, but fell furiously upon him, and, with little resistance,
dispersed his army. This loss did not discourage the king; he had
assembled a very considerable force, and, desirous still to encrease
it, he was advancing slowly that he might collect the scattered remains
of the army that had been defeated. The Baharnagash, though victorious,
saw with some concern that he could not avoid the king, whose courage
and capacity, both as a soldier and a general, left him every thing to
fear for his success.

Ever since the massacre of the princes upon mount Geshen by vizir
Mudgid, in the reign of David III. none of the remains of the royal
family had been confined as heretofore. Tascar, Menas’s nephew, was
then at liberty, and, to strengthen his cause, was proclaimed king
by the Baharnagash, soon after the defeat of Menas’s army under Zara
Johannes. He was a prince very mild and affable in his manners, in all
respects very unlike his uncle then reigning.

It was on the 1st of July 1561, that the king attacked the Baharnagash
in the plain of Woggora; and, having entirely routed his army, Tascar
was taken prisoner, and ordered by the king his uncle to be carried
to the brink of the high rock of Lamalmon, and, having been thrown
over the steep precipice, he was dashed to pieces. Isaac himself
escaped very narrowly, flying to the frontier of his government in
the neighbourhood of Masuah. The Baharnagash comprehended distinctly
to what a dangerous situation he was now reduced. No hopes of safety
remained but in a peace with the basha. This at first appeared not
easily obtained; for, while Isaac remained in his duty in the reign of
Claudius, he had fought with the basha, and lost his brother in the
engagement. But present necessity overcame the memory of past injuries.

Samur Basha was a man of capacity and temper; he had been in possession
of Masuah ever since the year 1558. He saw his own evident interest
in the measure, and appeared full as forward as the Baharnagash to
complete it. Isaac ceded Dobarwa to the basha, and put him into
immediate possession of it, and all the low country between that
and Masuah. By this acquisition, the Turks, before masters of
the sea-coast, became possessed of the whole of the flat country
corresponding thereto, as far as the mountains. Dobarwa is a large
trading town, situated in a country abounding with provisions of all
kinds which Masuah wanted, and it was the key of the province of Tigré
and the high land of Abyssinia.

Menas, at his accession, had received kindly the compliments of
congratulation made by the Portuguese patriarch, Oviedo. But hearing
that he still continued to preach, and that the effect of this was
frequent divisions and animosities among the people, he called him into
his presence, and strictly commanded him to desist, which the patriarch
positively refusing, the king lost all patience, and fell violently
upon him, beating him without mercy, tearing his clothes and beard,
and taking his chalice from him, that he might prevent him from saying
mass. He then banished him to a desert mountain, together with Francis
Lopez, where for seven months he endured all manner of hardships.

The king, in the mean time, published many rigorous proclamations
against the Portuguese. He would not permit them to marry with
Abyssinians. Those that were already married he forbade to go to the
Catholic churches with their husbands; and, having again called the
patriarch into his presence, he ordered him forthwith to leave his
kingdom upon pain of death. But Oviedo, who seems to have had an
ambition to be the proto-martyr, refused absolutely to obey these
commands. He declared that the orders of God were those he obeyed, not
the sinful ordinances of man; and, letting slip his cloak from his
shoulders, he offered his bare neck to the king to strike. This answer
and gesture so incensed Menas, that, drawing his sword, he would have
very soon put the patriarch in possession of the martyrdom he coveted,
had it not been for the interposition of the queen and officers that
stood round him.

Oviedo, after having been again soundly beaten, was banished a second
time to the mountain; and in this sentence were included all the rest
of the Portuguese priests, as well as others. But the bishop would not
submit to this punishment, but with the Portuguese, his countrymen,
joined the Baharnagash, who had already completed his treaty with Samur
Basha.

Isaac, before the Portuguese priests, had shewn a desire of becoming
Catholic, and of protecting, or even embracing, their religion; and
they, on their part, had assured him of a powerful and speedy succour
from India, which was just what he wanted; and with this view he had
placed himself to the greatest advantage, avoiding a battle, and
awaiting those auxiliaries, of the arrival of which the king was very
apprehensive. But the season of ships coming from India had passed
without any appearance of Portuguese, and the king was resolved to try
his fortune without expecting what another season might produce. On the
other hand, Isaac, strengthened by his league with the basha, thought
himself in a condition to take the field, rather than to lessen his
reputation by constantly declining battle.

In these dispositions both armies met, and the confederates were again
beaten by the king, with very little loss or resistance. This battle
was fought on the 20th of April 1562. Immediately after this victory
the king marched to Shoa, and sent several detachments of his army
before him to surprise the robbers called Dobas, and drive off their
cattle. What he intended by retiring so far from his enemies, the
Baharnagash and Basha, is what we do not know. Both of them were yet
alive, but probably so weakened by their last defeat as to leave no
apprehensions of being able to molest the country by any incursions.

The king, being advanced into the province of Ogge, was taken ill of
the Kolla, or low-country fever, and, after a few days illness, he died
there on the 13th of January 1563, leaving three sons, Sertza Denghel,
who succeeded him, Tascar, and Lesana Christos.

Some European historians[41] have advanced that Menas was defeated and
slain in this last engagement just now mentioned. This, however, is
expressly contradicted in the annals of these times, which mention the
death of the king in the terms I have here related; nor were either of
the chiefs of the rebels, the Basha or Baharnagash, slain that day. The
rebellion still continued, Isaac having proclaimed a prince of the name
of John to be king in place of Tascar, his deceased brother.

Menas was a prince of a very morose and violent disposition, but very
well adapted to the time in which he lived; brave in his person, active
and attentive to the affairs of government. He was sober, and an enemy
to all sorts of pleasure; frugal, and, in his dress or stile of living,
little different from any soldier in his army.

These qualities made him feared by the great, without being beloved
by the common soldiers accustomed to the liberality and magnificence
of Claudius; and this want of popularity gave the Romish priests
an opportunity to blacken his character beyond what in truth he
deserved. Thus, they say, that he had changed his religion during his
imprisonment, and turned Mahometan, and that it was from the Moors he
learned that ferocity of manners. But to this the answer is easy, That
the manners of his own countrymen, that is of mountaineers without any
profession but war and blood, in which they had been exercised for
centuries, were, probably of themselves, much more fierce and barbarous
than any he could learn among the people of Adel, occupied from time
immemorial in commerce and the pursuit of riches, and necessarily
engaged in an honest intercourse, and practice of hospitality, with
all the various nations that traded with them. Besides, were this
otherwise, he never had any society with these Moors. Banishment to
the top of a mountain[42] would have been his fate in Abyssinia, had
he lived a few years earlier or later than he did. Yet the mountain
upon which the royal family was confined had not yet produced one of
such savage manners; and it is not probable that he was more strictly
guarded in Adel than he would have been in his own country.

As to his religion, we can only say that he abhorred the Romish
faith, from the behaviour of those that professed it; and, that he
had abundant reason so to do, we need only appeal to their conduct in
the preceding reign, according to the accounts given by the Catholics
themselves. Let any man consider a king such as Claudius was; seated
on his throne in the midst of his courtiers and captains; cursed and
excommunicated; called heretic and liar to his face by an ignorant
peasant and stranger, such as John Bermudes; attacked in the night, and
forced to fly for his life by a body of strangers who depended upon him
for their daily bread: Next consider Menas, at his first accession,
desiring their patriarch to desist from preaching a religion that was
fatal to the quiet of his kingdom by sowing dissentions among it as it
had done in the two preceding reigns; and then figure a fanatic priest,
declaring that he would neither depart nor obey these orders; then say
what would have been done to strangers in France, Spain, or Portugal,
that had behaved in this manner to the sovereign or ministers of these
countries. Add to this, that all the Portuguese to a man appeared in
the army of a rebel subject in the last battle, supporting the cause
of a pretender to his crown. If, upon a fair review of all this, it
is any matter of surprise that he should be averse to such people and
behaviour, I am no judge of the fair feelings of man, and the duty a
prince owes to himself or posterity, his country or dignity.

As to his inclination to the Mahometan religion, the fact is, that
he opposed it even with his sword during his whole reign, and never
swerved from his attachment to the church of Alexandria, or his
friendship and respect to the Abuna Yousef, to the end of his life,
as far as we can learn from history. And least, of all people in the
world, does it become the Roman Catholics to accuse him of being
Mahometan, because a letter is still extant to Menas from pope Paul
III[43], wherein the pope stiles him beloved _son in Christ_, and the
_most holy of priests_.

[Illustration]




SERTZA DENGHEL, OR MELEC SEGUED.

From 1563 to 1595.

    _King crowned at Axum--Abyssinia invaded by the Galla--Account
    of that People--The king defeats the Army of Adel--Beats the
    Falasha, and kills their King--Battle of the Mareb--Basha
    slain, and Turks expelled from Dobarwa--King is poisoned--Names
    Za Denghel his Successor._


MENAS was succeeded by his son, Sertza Denghel, who took the name of
Melec Segued. He was only twelve years old when he came to the throne,
and was crowned at Axum with all the ancient ceremonies. The beginning
of his reign was marked by a mutiny of his soldiers, who, joining
themselves to some Mahometans, plundered the town, and then disbanded.
A misunderstanding also happened with Ayto Hamelmal, son to Romana
Werk, daughter of Hatzé Naod, which threatened many misfortunes in its
consequences.

Tecla Asfadin, governor of Tigré, was ordered by the king to march
against him; and the armies fought with equal advantage. But Hamelmal
dying soon after, his party dispersed without further trouble. Fasil,
too, his cousin, who had been appointed governor of Damot, rebelled
soon after, and was defeated by the king, who this year (the fourth of
his reign) commanded his army for the first time in person, and greatly
contributed to the victory, though he was but then sixteen years of age.

The sixth year of his reign he marched against a clan of Galla, called
Azé, whom he often beat, staying in the country two whole years. Upon
his return, he found the Baharnagash, Isaac and Harla, and other
malcontents, when a sort of a pacification followed; and having
received from the rebels considerable presents, he sat down at Dobit, a
small town in Dembea, where he passed the winter.

All this time Oviedo and the Portuguese did not appear at court.
The king, however, did not molest the priests in their baptisms,
preachings, or any of their functions. He often spake favourably of
their moral characters, their sobriety, patience, and decency of
their lives; but he condemned decisively the whole of their religious
tenets, which he pronounced to be full of danger and contradiction, and
destructive of civil order and monarchical government. At this period
the Galla again made an irruption into Gojam.

It is now time we should speak of this nation, which has contributed
more to weakening and reducing the Abyssinian empire, than all their
civil wars, and all the foreign enemies put together. When I spoke of
the languages of the several nations in Abyssinia, I took occasion
merely to mention the origin of these Galla, and their progress
northward, till their first hostile appearance in Abyssinia. I shall
now proceed to lay before the reader what further I have collected
concerning them. Many of them were in the king’s service while I was in
Abyssinia; and, from a multitude of conversations I had with all kinds
of them, I flatter myself I have gathered the best accounts regarding
these tribes.

The Galla are a very numerous nation of Shepherds, who probably lived
under or beyond the Line. What the cause of their emigration was we
do not pretend to say with certainty, but they have, for many years,
been in an uniform progress northward. They were at first all infantry,
and said the country they came from would not permit horses to breed
in it, as is the case in 13° north of the Line round Sennaar. Upon
coming northward, and conquering the Abyssinian provinces, and the
small Mahometan districts bordering on them, they have acquired a breed
of horses, which they have multiplied so industriously that they are
become a nation of cavalry, and now hold their infantry in very little
esteem.

As under the Line, to the south of Abyssinia, the land is exceedingly
high, and the sun seldom makes its appearance on account of the
continual rains, the Galla are consequently of a brown complexion,
with long black hair. Some, indeed, who live in the valleys of the
low country, are perfectly black. Although the principal food of this
people at first was milk and butter, yet, when they advanced into
drier climates, they learned of the Abyssinians to plow and sow the
fields, and to make bread. They seem to affect the number seven, and
have divided their immense multitude threefold by that number. They
all agree, that, when the nation advanced to the Abyssinian frontiers,
they were then in the centre of the continent. The ground beginning to
rise before them, seven of their tribes or nations filed off to the
east towards the Indian Ocean; and, after making settlements there, and
multiplying exceedingly, they marched forward due south into Bali and
Dawaro, which they first wasted by constant incursions, then conquered
and settled there in the reign of David III. in 1537.

Another division of seven tribes went off to the west about the same
time, and spread themselves in another semicircle round the south side
of the Nile, and all along its banks round Gojam, and to the east
behind the country of the Agows, (which are on the east side of the
Nile) to that of the Gongas and Gafats. The high woody banks of this
river have hitherto been their barrier to the southward; not but that
they have often fought for, and often conquered, and still oftener
plundered, the countries on the Abyssinian side of that river; and,
from this reign downwards, the scene of action with the Abyssinians has
constantly been on the east side of the river. All I mean is, they have
never made a settlement on the Abyssinian side of the Nile, except
such tribes of them as, from wars among themselves, have gone over to
the king of Abyssinia and obtained lands on the banks of that river,
opposite to the nation they have revolted from, against which they have
ever after been the securest bulwark.

A third division of seven tribes remained in the center, due south
of the low country of Shoa; and these are the least known, as having
made, the fewest incursions. They have, indeed, possessed Walaka, a
small province between Amhara and Shoa; but this has been permitted
politically by the governor of Shoa, as a barrier between him and
Abyssinia, on whose sovereign he scarcely acknowledges any dependence
but for form’s sake, his province being at present an hereditary
government descending from father to son.

All these tribes of Galla gird Abyssinia round at all points from east
to west, making inroads, and burning and murdering all that fall into
their hands. The privities of the men they cut off, dry, and hang
them up in their houses. They are so merciless as to spare not even
women with child, whom they rip up in hopes of destroying a male. The
western part of these Galla, which surrounds the peninsula of Gojam and
Damot, are called the Boren Galla; and those that are to the east are
named Bertuma Galla, though this last word is seldom used in history,
where the Galla to the westward are called Boren; and the others Galla
merely, without any other addition. All these tribes, though the most
cruel that ever appeared in any country, are yet governed by the
strictest discipline at home, where the smallest broil or quarrel among
individuals is taken cognizance of, and receives immediate punishment.

Each of the three divisions of Galla elect a king, that is, there is
a king for every seven tribes. There is also a kind of nobility among
them, from whose families alone the sovereign can be chosen. But there
are certain degrees of merit (all warlike) that raise, from time to
time, their plebeian families to nobility, and the right of suffrage.
No one of these nobles can be elected till past forty years of age,
unless he has slain with his own hand a number of men which, added to
his years, makes up forty.

The council of each of the seven tribes first meets separately in its
own district: Here it determines how many are necessary to be left
behind for the governing, guarding, and cultivating the territory,
while those fixed upon by most votes go as delegates to meet the
representatives of the other nations at the domicil, or head-quarters
of the king, among the tribe from which the sovereign of the last
seven years was taken. Here they sit down under a tree which seems to
be sacred, and the god of all the nations. It is called Wanzey[44];
has a white flower, and great quantity of foliage, and is very common
in Abyssinia. After a variety of votes, the number of candidates is
reduced to four, and the suffrage of six of these nations go then no
farther; but the seventh, whose turn it is to have a king out of their
tribe, choose, from among the four, one, whom they crown with a garland
of Wanzey, and put a sceptre, or bludgeon, of that wood in his hands,
which they call Buco.

The king of the western Galla is stiled Lubo, the other Mooty. At this
assembly, the king allots to each their scene of murder and rapine; but
limits them always to speedy returns in case the body of the nation
should have occasion for them. The Galla are reputed very good soldiers
for surprise, and in the first attack, but have not constancy or
perseverance. They accomplish incredible marches; swim rivers holding
by the horses tail, (an exercise to which both they and their horses
are perfectly trained;) do the utmost mischief possible in the shortest
time; and rarely return by the same way they came. They are excellent
light horse for a regular army in an enemy’s country.

Iron is very scarce among them, so that their principal arms are poles
sharpened at the end, and hardened in the fire, which they use like
lances. Their shields are made of bulls hides of a single fold, so
that they are very subject to warp in heat, or become too pliable and
soft in wet weather. Notwithstanding these disadvantages, the report
of their cruelty made such an impression upon the Abyssinians, that,
on their first engagements they rarely stood firmly the Galla’s first
onset. Besides this, the shrill and very barbarous noise they are
always used to make at the moment they charge, used to terrify the
horses and riders, so that a flight generally followed the attack made
by Galla horse.

These melancholy and frantic howls I had occasion to hear often in
those engagements that happened while I was in Abyssinia. The Edjow, a
body of Galla who had been in the late king Joas’s service, and were
relations to him by his mother, who was of that clan of southern Galla,
were constantly in the rebel army, and always in the most disaffected
part, who, with the troops of Begemder and Lasta, attacked the king’s
household, where he was in person; and, though they behaved with a
bravery even to rashness, most of them lost their lives, upon the
long pikes of the king’s black horse, without ever doing any notable
execution, as these horses were too-well trained to be at all moved
with their shrieks, when they charged, though their bravery and
fidelity merited a better fate.

The women are said to be very fruitful. They do not confine themselves
even a day after labour, but wash and return to their work immediately.
They plow, sow, and reap. The cattle tread out the corn, but the men
are the herdsmen, and take charge of the cattle in the fields.

Both sexes are something less than the middle size, exceedingly light
and agile. Both, but especially the men, plait their hair with the
bowels and guts of oxen, which they wear likewise, like belts, twisted
round their middle; and these, as they putrify, occasion a terrible
stench. Both copiously anoint their heads and bodies with butter,
or melted grease, which is continually raining from them, and which
indicates that they came from a country hotter than that which they
now possess. They greatly resemble the Hottentots in this filthy taste
of dress. The rest of their body is naked; a piece of skin only covers
them before; and they wear a goat’s skin on their shoulders, in shape
of a woman’s handkerchief, or tippet.

It has been said[45], that no religion was ever discovered among them.
I imagine that the facts upon which this opinion is founded have never
been sufficiently investigated. The Wanzey-tree, under which their
kings are crowned, is avowedly worshipped for a god in every tribe.
They have certain stones also, for an object of their devotion, which
I never could sufficiently understand to give further description of
them. But they certainly pay adoration to the moon, especially the
new moon, for of this I have frequently been a witness. They likewise
worship certain stars in particular positions, and at different times
of the year, and are, in my opinion, still in the ancient religion of
Sabaism. All of them believe that, after death, they are to live again;
that they are to rise with their body, as they were on earth, to enter
into another life they know not where, but they are to be in a state of
body infinitely more perfect than the present, and are to die no more,
nor suffer grief, sickness, or trouble of any kind. They have very
obscure, or no ideas at all of future punishment; but their reward is
to be a moderate state of enjoyment with the same family and persons
with which they lived on earth. And this is very nearly the same belief
with the other Pagan nations in Africa with which I have conversed
intimately; and this is what writers generally call a belief of the
immortality of the soul. Nor did I ever know one savage that had a more
distinct idea of it, or ever separated it from the immortality of the
body.

The Galla to the south are mostly Mahometans; on the east and west
chiefly Pagans. They intermarry with each other, but suffer no
strangers to live among them. The Moors, however, by courage, patience,
and attention, have found out the means of trading with them in a
tolerable degree of safety. The goods they carry are coarse Surat
blue cloaths, called _marowty_; also myrrh and salt. This last is the
principal and most valuable article.

The Galla sometimes marry the Abyssinian women, but the issue of those
marriages are incapable of all employment. Their form of marriage is
the following: The bridegroom, standing before the parents of the
bride, holds grass in his right hand and the dung of a cow in his left.
He then says, “May this never enter, nor this ever come out, if he does
not do what he promises;” that is, may the grass never enter the cow’s
mouth to feed it, or may she die before it is discharged. Matrimonial
vows, moreover, are very simple; he swears to his bride that he shall
give her meat and drink while living, and bury her when dead.

Polygamy is allowed among them, but the men are commonly content with
one wife. Such, indeed, is their moderation in this respect, that it
is the women that solicit the men to increase the number of their
wives. The love of their children seems to get a speedy ascendency over
passion and pleasure, and is a noble part of the character of these
savages that ought not to be forgot. A young woman, having a child
or two by her husband, intreats and solicits him that he would take
another wife, when she names to him all the beautiful girls of her
acquaintance, especially those that she thinks likeliest to have large
families. After the husband has made his choice, she goes to the tent
of the young woman, and sits behind it in a supplicant posture, till
she has excited the attention of the family within. She then, with an
audible voice, declares who she is; that she is daughter of such a one;
that her husband has all the qualifications for making a woman happy;
that she has only two children by him; and, as her family is so small,
she comes to solicit their daughter for her husband’s wife, that their
families may be joined together, and be strong; and that her children,
from their being few in number, may not fall a prey to their enemies
in the day of battle; for the Galla always fight in families, whether
against one another, or against other enemies.

When she has thus obtained a wife for her husband, she carries her
home, puts her to bed with her husband, where, having left her, she
feasts with the bride’s relations. There the children of the first
marriage are produced, and the men of the bride’s family put each their
hands upon these children’s heads, and afterwards take the oath in the
usual manner, to live and die with them as their own offspring. The
children, then, after this species of adoption, go to their relations,
and visit them for the space of seven days. All that time the husband
remains at home in possession of his new bride; at the end of which
he gives a feast, when the first wife is seated by her husband, and
the young one serves the whole company. The first wife from this day
keeps her precedence; and the second is treated by the first wife like
a grown up-daughter. I believe it would be very long before the love
of their families would introduce this custom among the young women of
Britain.

When a father dies and leaves many children, the eldest succeeds to the
whole inheritance without division; nor is he obliged, at any time, or
by any circumstance, to give his brothers a part afterwards. If the
father is alive when the son first begins to shave his head, which is
a declaration of manhood, he gives two or three milk-cows, or more,
according to his rank and fortune. These, and all their produce, remain
the property of the child to whom they were given by his father; and
these the brother is obliged to pay to him upon his father’s death, in
the same number and kinds. The eldest brother, is moreover, obliged to
give the sister, whenever she is marriageable, whatever other provision
the father may have made in his lifetime for her, with all its increase
from the day of the donation.

When the father becomes old and unfit for war, he is obliged to
surrender his whole effects to his eldest son, who is bound to give him
aliment, and nothing else; and, when the eldest brother dies, leaving
younger brothers behind him, and a widow young enough to bear children,
the youngest brother of all is obliged to marry her; but the children
of the marriage are always accounted as if they were the eldest
brother’s; nor does this marriage of the youngest brother to the widow
entitle him to any part of the deceased’s fortune.

The southern Galla are called Elma Kilelloo, Elma Gooderoo, Elma
Robali, Elma Doolo, Elma Bodena, Elma Horreta, and Elma Michaeli; these
are the seven southern nations which the Mahometan traders pass through
in their way to Narea, the southernmost country the Abyssinians ever
conquered.

The western Galla for their principal clans have the Djawi, Edjow
or Ayzo, and Toluma, and these were the clans we principally fought
with when I was in Abyssinia. They are chiefly Pagans. Some of their
children, who were left young in court, when their fathers fled, after
the murder of the late king their master, were better Christians and
better soldiers than any Abyssinians we had.

It is not a matter of small curiosity to know what is their food, that
is so easy of carriage as to enable them to traverse immense deserts,
that they may, without warning, fall upon the towns and villages in the
cultivated country of Abyssinia. This is nothing but coffee roasted,
till it can be pulverised, and then mixed with butter to a consistency
that will suffer it to be rolled up in balls, and put in a leather bag.
A ball of this composition, between the circumference of a shilling
and half-a-crown, about the size of a billiard-ball, keeps them, they
say, in strength and spirits during a whole day’s fatigue, better than
a loaf of bread, or a meal of meat. Its name in Arabia and Abyssinia
is Bun, but I apprehend its true name is Caffé, from Caffa the south
province of Narea, whence it is first said to have come; it is white
in the bean. The coffee-tree is the wood of the country, produced
spontaneously everywhere in great abundance, from Caffa to the banks of
the Nile.

Thus much for this remarkable nation, whose language is perfectly
different from any in Abyssinia, and is the same throughout all the
tribes, with very little variation of dialect. This is a nation that
has conquered some of the finest provinces of Abyssinia, and of whose
inroads we shall hereafter have occasion to speak continually; and it
is very difficult to say how far they might not have accomplished the
conquest of the whole, had not providence interposed in a manner little
expected, but more efficacious than a thousand armies, and all the
inventions of man.

The Galla, before their inroads into Abyssinia, had never in their own
country seen or heard of the small-pox. This disease met them in the
Abyssinian villages. It raged among them with such violence, that whole
provinces conquered by them became half-desert; and, in many places,
they were forced to become tributary to those whom before they kept in
continual fear. But this did not happen till the reign of Yasous the
Great, at the beginning of the present century, where we shall take
fresh notice of it, and now proceed with what remains of the reign
of Sertza Denghel, whom we left with his army in the 9th year of his
reign, residing at Dobit, a small town in Dembea, watching the motion
of the rebels, Isaac Baharnagash, and others, his confederates.

The tenth year of his reign, as soon as the weather permitted him, the
king went into Gojam to oppose the inroads of the Djawi, a clan of the
western or Boren Galla, who then were in possession of the Buco, or
royal dignity, among the seven nations. But they had repassed the Nile
upon the first news of the king’s march, without having time to waste
the country. The king then went to winter in Bizamo, which is south of
the Nile, the native country of these Galla, the Djawi.

If this nation, the Galla, has deserved ill of the Abyssinians by the
frequent inroads made into their country, they must, however, confess
one obligation, that in the end they entirely ruined their ancient
enemy, the Mahometan king of Adel, and reduced him to a state of
perfect insignificance.

Sertza Denghel then returned with his army into Dembea, where, finding
the militia of that province much disaffected by communication with the
Moorish soldiers settled among them from Gragnè’s time to this day, and
that most of them had in their hearts forsaken the Christian religion,
and were all ready to fail in their allegiance, he assembled the
greatest part of them without their arms, and, surrounding them with
his soldiers, cut them to pieces, to the number of 3000 men.

In the 13th year of his reign, Mahomet king of Adel marched out of his
own country with the view of joining the Basha and Baharnagash. But
the king, ever watchful over the motions of his enemies, surprised
the Baharnagash before his junction either with Mahomet or the basha,
and defeated or dispersed his army, obliging him to fly in disguise,
with the utmost danger of being taken prisoner, to hide himself with
the basha at Dobarwa. He then appointed Darguta, governor of Tigré, an
old and experienced officer, giving him the charge of the province,
and to watch the basha; and, leaving with him his wounded, (and in
their place taking some fresh soldiers from Darguta) he, by forced
marches, endeavoured to meet Mahomet, who had not heard of his victory
over Isaac; and being informed that the king of Adel was encamped on
the hither side of the river Wali, having passed it to join Isaac,
the king, by a sudden movement, crossed the river, and came opposite
to Mahomet’s quarters, who was then striking his tents, having just
heard of the fate of the Baharnagash. Mahomet and his whole army were
struck with a panic at this unexpected appearance of the king on the
opposite side of the river, which had cut off his retreat to Adel.
Fearing, however, there might still be an enemy behind him, and that
he should be hemmed in between both, he resolved to pass, but did it
in so tumultuous a manner that the king’s army had no trouble but to
slaughter those who arrived at the opposite bank. Great part of the
cavalry, seeing the fate of their companions at the ford, attempted to
pass above and below by swimming: but, though the river was deep and
smooth, the banks were high, and many were drowned, not being able to
scramble up on the other side. Many were also destroyed by stones, and
the lances of Sertza Denghel’s men, from the banks above; some passed,
however, joining Mahomet, and leaving the rest of the army to attempt a
passage at the ford, crossed with the utmost speed lower down the river
without being pursued, and carried the news of their own defeat to Adel.

The whole Moorish army perished this day except the horse, either by
the sword or in the river; nor had the Moors received so severe a
blow since the defeat of Gragnè by Claudius. The king then decamped,
and took post at Zarroder, on the frontiers of Adel, with a design to
winter there and lay waste the country, into which he intended to march
as soon as the fair weather returned. But it was the misfortune of this
great prince, that his enemies were situated at the two most distant
extremities of the kingdom. For the Galla attacked Gojam on the west,
at the very time he prepared to enter Adel on the east. Without loss of
time, however, he traversed the whole kingdom of Abyssinia, and came up
with the Boren Galla upon the river Madge, but no action of consequence
followed. The Galla, attempting the king’s camp in the night, and
finding themselves too weak to carry it, retreated immediately into
their own country. While returning to Dembea, he met a party of the
Falasha, called Abati, at Wainadega, and entirely destroyed them, so
that not one escaped.

The king was now so formidable that no army of the enemy dared to face
him, and he obliged the Falasha to give up their king Radaet, whom he
banished to Wadge; and the four following years he spent in ravaging
the country of his enemies the Galla, in Shat and Bed, and that of the
Falasha in Samen and Serkè, where he beat Caliph king of the Falasha,
who had succeeded Radaet.

The Galla, in advancing towards Gojam and Damot, had over-run the
whole low country between the mountains of Narea and the Nile. The
king, desirous to open a communication with a country where there was
a great trade, especially for gold, crossed the Nile in his way to
that province, the Galla flying everywhere before him. He was received
with very great joy by the prince of that country, who looked upon him
as his deliverer from those cruel enemies. Here he received many rich
presents; more particularly a large quantity of gold, and he wintered
at Cutheny in that province, where Abba Hedar his brother died, having
been blown up with gun-powder, with his wife and children. The Nareans
desired, this year, to be admitted to the Christian faith; and they
were converted and baptised by a mission of priests sent by the king
for that purpose.

At the time he was rescuing the kingdom of Narea, Cadward Basha, a
young officer of merit and reputation, lately come from Constantinople
to Dawaro as basha of Masuah, had begun his command with making inroads
into Tigré, and driving off a number of the inhabitants into slavery.
The king, necessarily engaged at a distance, suffered these injuries
with a degree of impatience; and, after having provided for the
security of the several countries immediately near him, he marched with
his army directly for Woggora, committing every degree of excess in his
march, in order to provoke the Falasha to descend from their heights
and offer him battle.

A frugal œconomical people, such as the Jews are, could not bear to
see their cattle and crops destroyed in so wanton a manner before
their very faces. They came, therefore, down in immense numbers to
attack the king, one of the most excellent generals Abyssinia ever
had, at the head of a small, but veteran army. Geshen, brother of the
famous Gideon, was then king of the Jews, and commanded the army of
his countrymen. The battle was fought on the plain of Woggora on the
19th of January 1594, with the success that was to be expected. Four
thousand of the Jewish army were slain upon the spot; and, among them,
Geshen, their unfortunate king and leader.

After this victory, Sertza Denghel marched his army into Kuara,
through the country where the Jews had many strong-holds, and received
everywhere their submission. Then turning to the left, he came through
the country of the Shangalla, called Woombarea, and so to that of the
Agows. There he heard that new troubles were meditating in Damot; but
the inhabitants of that province were not yet ripe enough to break out
into open rebellion.

That he might not, therefore, have two enemies at such a distance from
each other upon his hands at once, this year, as soon as the rains
were over, he determined to march and attack the basha. The basha was
very soon informed of his designs, and as soon prepared to meet them;
so that the king found him already in the field, encamped on his own
side of the Mareb, but without having committed, till then, any act
of hostility. He marched out of his camp, and formed, upon seeing the
royal army approach; leaving a sufficient field for the king to draw up
in, if he should incline to cross the river, and attack him.

This confident, rather than prudent conduct of the basha, did not
intimidate the king, who being used to improve every advantage coolly,
and without bravado, embraced this very opportunity his enemy chose
to give him. He formed, therefore, on his own side of the Mareb, and
passed it in as good order as possible, considering it is a swift
stream, and very deep at that season of the year. He halted several
times while his men were in the water, to put them again in order, as
if he had expected to be attacked the moment he landed on the other
side. The basha, a man of knowledge in his profession, who saw this
cautious conduct of the king, is said to have cried out, “How unlike he
is to what I have heard of his father!” alluding to the general rash
behaviour of the late king Menas whilst at the head of his army.

Sertza Denghel having left all his baggage on the other side, and
passed the river, drew up his army in the same deliberate manner in
which he had crossed the Mareb, and formed opposite to the basha; as if
he had been acting under him, and by his orders, availing himself with
great attention of all the advantages the ground could afford him. The
basha, confident in the superior valour of his troops, thought, now he
had got the king between him and the river, that he would easily that
day finish Sertza Denghel’s life and reign.

The battle began with the most determined resolution and vigour on
both sides. The Abyssinian foot drove back the Turkish infantry; and
the king, dismounting from his horse, with his lance and shield in
his hand, and charging at their head, animated them to preserve that
advantage. On the other hand, the basha, who had soon put to flight
part of the Abyssinian horse with whom he had engaged, fell furiously
upon the foot commanded by the king, the Turks making a great carnage
among them with their sabres, and the affair became but doubtful, when
Robel, gentleman of the bed-chamber to the king, who commanded the
pike-men on horseback, part of the king’s household troops, seeing his
master’s danger, charged the Turkish horse where he saw the basha in
person, and, clearing his way, broke his pike upon an officer of the
basha who carried the standard immediately before him, and threw him
dead at his feet. Being without other arms, he then drew the short
crooked knife which the Abyssinians always carry in their girdle, and,
pushing up his horse close before the basha could recover from his
surprise, he plunged it in his throat, so that he expired instantly. So
unlooked-for a spectacle struck a panic into the troops. The Turkish
horse first turned their backs, and a general rout followed.

The basha’s body was carried upon a mule out of the field, and struck a
terror into all the Mahometans wherever it passed. It no sooner entered
Dobarwa than it was obliged to be carried out at the other end of the
town. Sertza Denghel was not one that slumbered upon a victory. He
entered Dobarwa sword in hand, putting all the Pagans and Mahometans
that fell in his way to death, and, in this manner, pursued them to
the frontiers of Masuah, leaving many to die for want of water in that
desert.

The king, in honour of this brave action performed by Robel, ordered
what follows to be writ in letters of gold, and inserted in the
records of the kingdom: “Robel, servant to Sertza Denghel, and son to
Menetcheli, slew a Turkish basha on horseback with a common knife.”

Sertza Denghel, having thus delivered himself from the most formidable
of his enemies, marched through Gojam again into Narea, extirpating,
all the way he went, the Galla that obstructed his way to that state.
He left an additional number of priests and monks to instruct them in
the Christian religion; though there are some historians of this reign
who pretend that it was not till this second visit that Narea was
converted.

However this may be, victory had everywhere attended his steps, and
he was now preparing to chastise the malcontents at Damot, when he
was accosted by a priest, famous for his holiness and talent for
divination, who warned him not to undertake that war. But the king,
expressing his contempt of both the message and messenger, declared his
fixed resolution to invade Damot without delay. The priest is said
to have limited his advice still further, and to have only begged him
to remember not to eat the fish of a certain river in the territory
of Giba in the province of Shat. The king, however, flushed with his
victory over the Boren Galla, forgot the name of the river and the
injunction; and, having ate fish out of this river, was immediately
after taken dangerously ill, and died on his return.

The writer of his life says, that the fatal effects of this river were
afterwards experienced in the reign of Yasous the Great, at the time
in which he wrote, when the king’s whole army, encamped along the
sides of this river, were taken with violent sickness after eating
the fish caught in it, and that many of the soldiers died. Whether
this be really fact or not, I will not take upon me to decide. Whether
fish, or any other animal, living in water impregnated with poisonous
minerals, can preserve its own life, and yet imbibe a quantity of
poison sufficient to destroy the men that should eat it, seems to me
very doubtful. Something like this is said to happen in oysters, which
are found on copperas beds, or have preparations of copperas thrown
upon them to tinge a part of them with green. I do not, however, think
it likely, that the creature would live after this metallic dose, or
preserve a taste that would make it food for man till he accumulated a
quantity sufficient to destroy him.

Sertza Denghel was of a very humane affable disposition, very different
from his father Menas. He was stedfast in his adherence to the church
of Alexandria, and seemed perfectly indifferent as to the Romish church
and clergy. In conversation, he frequently condemned their tenets, but
always commended the sobriety and sanctity of their lives. He left
no legitimate sons, but many daughters by his wife Mariam Sena; and
two natural sons, Za Mariam and Jacob. He had also a nephew called _Za
Denghel_, son of his brother Lesana Christos.

It is absolutely contrary to truth, what is said by Tellez and others,
that the illegitimate sons have no right to succeed to the crown. There
is, indeed, no sort of difference, as may be seen by many examples in
the course of this history.

Sertza Denghel at first seemed to have intended his nephew, Za Denghel,
to succeed him, a prince who had every good quality; was arrived at an
age fit for governing, and had attended him and distinguished himself
in great part of his wars. But, being upon his death-bed, he changed
his mind, probably at the instigation of the queen and the ambitious
nobles, who desired to have the government in their own hands during a
long minority. His son Jacob, a boy of seven years old, was now brought
into court, and treated as heir-apparent, which everybody thought was
but natural and pardonable from the affection of a father.

At last when he found that he was sick to death, the interest and love
of his country seemed to overcome even the ties of blood; so that,
calling his council together around his bed, he designed his successor
in this last speech: ‘As I am sensible I am at the point of death, next
to the care of my soul, I am anxious for the welfare of my kingdom.
My first idea was to appoint Jacob my son to be successor; and I had
done so unless for his youth, and it is probable neither you nor I
could have cause to repent it. Considering, however, the state of
my kingdom, I prefer its interest to the private affection I bear my
son; and do, therefore, hereby appoint Za Denghel my nephew to succeed
me, and be your king; and recommend him to you as fit for war, ripe
in years, exemplary in the practice of every virtue, and as deserving
of the crown by his good qualities, as he is by his near relation to
the royal family.’ And with these words the king expired in the end of
August 1595, and was buried in the island Roma.

As soon as Sertza Denghel died, the nobility resumed their former
resolutions. The very reasons the dying king had given them, why
Za Denghel was fitted to reign, were those for the which they were
determined to reject him; as they, after so long a reign as the last,
were perfectly weary at being kept in their duty, and desired nothing
more than an infant king and a long minority: this they found in Jacob.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




ZA DENGHEL.

From 1595 to 1604.

    _Za Denghel dethroned--Jacob a Minor succeeds--Za Denghel is
    restored--Banishes Jacob to Narea--Converted to the Romish
    Religion--Battle of Bartcho, and Death of the King._


SERTZA DENGHEL had several daughters, one of whom was married to Kefla
Wahad, governor of the province of Tigré, and another to Athanasius,
governor of Amhara. These two were the most powerful men then in
the kingdom. The empress and her two sons-in-law saw plainly, that
the succession of Za Denghel, a man of ripe years, possessed of
every requisite for reigning, was to exclude them from any share in
government but a subaltern one, for which they were to stand candidates
upon their own merits, in common with the rest of the nobility.

Accordingly, no sooner was Sertza Denghel dead, perhaps some time
before, but a conspiracy was formed to change the order of succession,
and this was immediately executed by order of this triumvirate, who
sent a body of soldiers and seized Za Denghel, and carried him close
prisoner to Dek, a large island in the lake Tzana, belonging to the
queen, where he was kept for some time, till he escaped and hid himself
in the wild inaccessible mountains of Gojam, which there form the
banks of the Nile. They carried their precautions still further; and
subsequent events after shewed, that these were well-grounded. They
sent a party of men at the same time to surprise Socinios, but he,
sufficiently upon his guard, no sooner saw the fate of his cousin, Za
Denghel, than he withdrew himself, but in such a manner that shewed
plainly he knew the value of his own pretensions, and was not to be an
unconcerned spectator if a revolution was to happen.

In order to understand perfectly the claims of those princes, who were
by turns placed on the throne in the bloody war that followed, it will
be necessary to know that the emperor David III. had three sons: The
eldest was Claudius, who succeeded him in the empire; the history of
whose reign we have already given: The second was Jacob, who died a
minor before his brother, but left two sons, Tascar and Facilidas: The
third son was Menas, called Adamas Segued, who succeeded Claudius his
brother in the empire; whose reign we have likewise given in its proper
place.

Menas had four sons; Sertza Denghel, called Melec Segued, who succeeded
his father in the empire, and whose history we have just now finished;
the second Aquieter; the third Abatè; and the fourth, Lesana Christos;
whose son was that Za Denghel of whom we were last speaking, appointed
to succeed to the throne by his uncle Sertza Denghel, when on his
death-bed.

Tascar, the son of Jacob, died a minor; he rebelled against his uncle
Menas, in confederacy with the Baharnagash, as we have already seen;
and his army being beat by his uncle and sovereign, he was, by his
order, thrown over the steep precipice of Lamalmon, and dashed to
pieces. Facilidas, the second remaining son of the same minor Jacob,
lived many years, possessed great estates in Gojam, and died afterwards
in battle, fighting against the Galla, in defence of these possessions.

This Facilidas had a natural son named Socinios, who inherited his
father’s possessions; was nephew to Sertza Denghel, and cousin-german
to Za Denghel appointed to succeed to the throne; so that Za Denghel
being once removed, as Jacob had been postponed, there could be no
doubt of Socinios’s claim as the nearest heir-male to David III.
commonly called Wanag Segued.

Socinios, from his infancy, had been trained to arms, and had undergone
a number of hardships in his uncle’s wars. Part of his estate had
been seized, after his father’s death, by men in power, favourites of
Sertza Denghel; and he hoped for a complete restitution of them from Za
Denghel his cousin, when he should succeed, for these two were as much
connected with each other by friendship and affection, as they were by
blood. Nor would any step, says the historian, have ever been taken
by Socinios towards mounting the throne, had Za Denghel his cousin
succeeded, as by right he ought.

In the mean time, he was at the head of a considerable band of
soldiers; had assisted Fasa Christos, governor of Gojam, in defeating
the Galla, who had over-run that province; and, by his courage and
conduct that day, had left a strong impression upon the minds of the
troops that he would soon become the most capable and active soldier of
his time.

The queen and her two sons-in-law being disappointed in their attempt
upon Socinios, were obliged to take the only step that remained in
their choice, which was to appoint the infant Jacob[46] king, a child
of seven years old, and put him under the tutelage of Ras Athanasius.

The empress Mariam Sena, and her two sons-in-law, had gained to their
party Za Selassé, a person of low birth, native of an obscure nation
of Pagans, called Guraguè, a man esteemed for bravery and conduct, and
beloved by the soldiers; but turbulent and seditious, without honour,
gratitude, or regard, either to his word, to his sovereign, or the
interests of his country.

Jacob had suffered patiently the direction of those that governed him,
so long as the excuse of his minority was a good one. But being now
arrived at the age of 17, he began to put in, by degrees, for his share
in the direction of affairs; and observing some steps that tended to
prolong the government of his tutors, by his own power he banished Za
Selassé, the author of them, into the distant kingdom of Narea.

This vigorous proceeding alarmed the empress and her party. They saw
that the measure taken by Jacob would presently lead all good men
and lovers of their country to support him, and to annihilate their
power. They resolved not to wait till this took place, but instantly to
restore Za Denghel, whom, with great difficulty, they found hid in the
mountains between Gojam and Damot. And, to remove every suspicion in Za
Denghel’s breast, Ras Athanasius repaired to the palace, giving Jacob
publicly, even on the throne, the most abusive and scurrilous language,
calling him an obstinate, stubborn, foolish boy; declaring him degraded
from being king, and announcing to his face the coming of Za Denghel to
supplant him. Jacob’s behaviour on so unexpected an occasion was not
such as Athanasius’s rash speech led to expect. He gave a cool and mild
reply to these invectives; but, finding himself entirely in his enemy’s
power, without losing a moment, he left his palace in the night, taking
the road to Samen, not doubting of safety and protection if he could
reach his mother’s relations among those high, rocky mountains.

Fortune at first seemed to favour his endeavours. He arrived at a small
village immediately in the neighbourhood of the country to which he was
going; but there he was discovered and made prisoner; carried back and
delivered to Za Denghel his rival, whom he found placed on his throne.

In all these cases, it is the invariable, though barbarous practice of
Abyssinia, to mutilate any such pretender to the throne, by cutting off
his nose, ear, hand, or foot, as they shall be inclined the patient
should die or live after the operation, it being an established law,
that no person can succeed to the throne, as to the priesthood, without
being perfect in all his limbs. Za Denghel, as he could not adopt so
inhuman a procedure even with a rival, contented himself with only
banishing Jacob to Narea.

Ever since that period of Menas’s reign, when Samur, basha of Masuah,
had been put in possession of Dobarwa in virtue of a treaty with
Isaac Baharnagash, then in rebellion, the Catholic religion was left
destitute of all support, the fathers that had remained in Abyssinia
being dead, and the entry into that kingdom shut up by the violent
animosity of the Turks, and the cruelties they exercised upon all
missionaries that fell into their hands. The few Catholics that
remained were absolutely deprived of all assistance, when Melchior
Sylvanus, an Indian vicar of the church of St Anne at Goa, was pitched
upon as a proper person to be sent to their relief. His language,
colour, eastern air and manners, seemed to promise that he would
succeed, and baffle the vigilance of the Turks.

He arrived at Masuah in 1597, and entered Abyssinia unsuspected; but
the power of the Turk being much lessened by the great defeat given
them by Sertza Denghel, who slew Cadward Basha, and retook Dobarwa
and all its dependencies, as has been already mentioned, a very
considerable part of their former dangers, the missionaries might
now hope to escape. But there still remained others obstructing the
communication with India, which, however, were surmountable, and gave
way, as most of the kind do, to prudence, courage, and perseverance.

Accordingly, in the year 1600, Peter Paez, the most capable, as well
as most successful missionary that ever entered Ethiopia, arrived at
Masuah, after having suffered a long imprisonment, and many other
hardships, on his way to that island; and, taking upon him the charge
of the Portuguese, relieved Melchior Sylvanus, who returned to India.

Paez, however, did not press on to court as his predecessors, and even
his successors constantly did, but, confining himself to the convent of
Fremona in Tigré, he first set himself by an invincible application to
attain the knowledge of the Geez written language, in which he arrived
to a degree of knowledge superior to that of the natives themselves.
He then applied to the instruction of youth, keeping a school, where
he taught equally the children of the Portuguese, and those of the
Abyssinians. The great progress made by the scholars speedily spread
abroad the reputation of the master. First of all, John Gabriel, one of
the most distinguished officers of the Portuguese, spoke of him in the
warmest terms of commendation to Jacob, then upon the throne, who sent
to Paez, and ordered his attendance as soon as the rainy season should
be over.

In the month of April 1604, Peter, attended only by two of his young
disciples, presented himself to the king, who then held his court at
Dancaz, where he was received with the same honours as are bestowed
upon men of the first rank, to the great discontent of the Abyssinian
monks, who easily foresaw that their humiliation would certainly
follow this exaltation of Petros; nor were they mistaken. In a dispute
held before the king next day, Peter produced the two boys, as more
than sufficient to silence all the theologians in Abyssinia. Nor can
it ever be doubted, by any who know the ignorance of these brutish
priests, but that the victory, in these scholastic disputes, would be
fairly, easily, and completely on the side of the children.

Mass was then said according to the usage of the church of Rome, which
was followed by a sermon (among the first ever preached in Abyssinia,)
but so far surpassing, in elegance and purity of diction, any thing yet
extant in the learned language, Geez, that all the hearers began to
look upon this as the first miracle on the part of the preacher.

Za Denghel was so taken with it, that, from that instant, he not only
resolved to embrace the Catholic religion, but declared this his
resolution to several friends, and soon after to Paez himself, under
an oath of secrecy that he should conceal it for a time. This oath,
prudently exacted from Peter, was as imprudently rendered useless by
the zeal of the king himself, who being of too sanguine a disposition
to temporize after he was convinced, published a proclamation,
forbidding the religious observation of Saturday, or the Jewish
sabbath, for ever after. He likewise ordered letters to be wrote to
the pope Clement VIII. and to Philip III. king of Spain and Portugal,
wherein he offered them his friendship, whilst he requested mechanics
to assist, and Jesuits to instruct his people.

These sudden and violent measures were presently known; and every
wretch that had, from other causes, the seeds of rebellion sown in his
heart, began now to pretend they were only nourished there by a love
and attachment to the true religion.

Many of the courtiers followed the king’s example; some as courtiers
for the sake of the king’s favour, and meaning to adhere to the
religion of Rome no longer than it was a fashion at court, promoted
their interest, and exposed them to no danger; others, from their
firm attachment to the king, the resolution to support him as their
rightful sovereign, and a confidence in his superior judgment, and
that he best knew what was most for the kingdom’s advantage in its
present distracted state, and for the confirmation of his own power,
so intimately connected with the welfare of his people. Few, very few
it is believed, adopted the Catholic faith, from that one discourse
only, however pure the language, however eloquent the preacher. A
hundred years and more had passed without convincing the Abyssinians in
general, or without any material proof that they were prepared to be so.

However, the Jesuits have quoted an instance of this instantaneous
conversion by the sermon, which, for their credit, I will not omit,
though no notice is taken of it in the annals of those times, where it
is not indeed to be expected, nor do I mean that it is less credible on
this account.

An Abyssinian monk, of very advanced years, came forward to Peter
Paez, and said in a loud voice before the king, “Although I have lived
to a very great age, without a doubt of the Alexandrian faith, I
bless God that he has spared me to this day, and thereby given me an
opportunity of choosing a better. The things we knew before, you have
so well explained, that they become still more intelligible; and we are
thereby confirmed in our belief. Those things that were difficult, and
which we could hardly understand, you have made so clear, that we now
wonder at our own blindness in not having seen them plainly before.
For these benefits which I now confess to have received, I here make
my declaration, that it is my stedfast purpose, with the assistance of
Almighty God, to live and die in the faith you profess, and have now
preached.”

Among those of the court most attached to the king was Laeca Mariam,
the inseparable companion of his good and bad fortune, who had followed
his master from principles of duty and affection, without designing to
throw away a consideration upon what were likely to be the consequences
to himself. He was reputed, in his character and abilities as a
soldier, to be equal to Za Selassé, but a very different man, compared
to him in his qualities of civil life; for he was sober in his general
behaviour, sparing in discourse, and much more ready to do a good
office than to promise one; very affable and courteous in his manner,
and of so humble and unassuming a deportment, that it was thought
impossible to be real in a man, who had so often proved his superiority
over others upon trial.

This man, a true royalist, was one of those that embraced the Catholic
religion that day, probably following the example of the king; and
this, in the hands of wicked men their enemies, became very soon a
pretence for the murder of both; for Za Selassé, impatient of a rival
in any thing, more especially in military knowledge, began to hold
seditious assemblies, and especially with the monks, whom he taught to
believe what the king’s conduct daily confirmed, that the Alexandrian
faith was totally reprobated, and no religion would be tolerated but
that of the church of Rome.

Gojam, a province always inveterate against any thing that bore the
smallest inclination to the church of Rome, declared against the king;
and, before he went to join his associates, the traitor, Za Selassé, in
a conference he had with the Abuna Petros, proposed to him to absolve
Za Denghel’s subjects and soldiers from their oaths of allegiance to
their sovereign. The Abuna, a man of very corrupt and bad life, very
hearty in the cause, and an enemy to the king, was staggered at this
proposal; not that he was averse to it, because it might do mischief,
but because he doubted whether any such effect would follow it as Za
Selassé expected; and he, therefore, asked what good he expected from
such a novelty? when this traitor assured him, that it would be most
efficacious for that very reason, because it was then first introduced:
the Abuna forthwith absolved the soldiers and subjects of Za Denghel
from their allegiance, declaring the king excommunicated and accursed,
together with all those that should support him, or favour his cause.

I must here observe, that, though we are now writing the history of the
17th century, this was the first example of any priest excommunicating
his sovereign in Abyssinia, except that of Honorius, who excommunicated
Amda Sion for the repeated commission of incest. And the doubt the
zealot Abuna Petros had of its effect as being a novelty, which fact
the Jesuits themselves attest, shews it was a practice that had not its
origin in the church of Alexandria. Neither had these curses of the
Abuna any visible effect, till Za Selassé had put himself at the head
of an army raised in Gojam. The king was prepared to meet him, and
ready to march from Dancaz.

Za Denghel immediately marched out into the plain of Bartcho, and
in the way was deserted, first by Ras Athanasius, then by many of
his troops; and, by this great desertion in his army, found the
first effects of the Abuna’s curses, insomuch, that John Gabriel, a
Portuguese officer of the first distinction, advised the king to retire
in time, and avoid a battle, by flying to strong-holds for a season,
till the present delusion among his subjects should cease. But the
king, thinking himself dishonoured by avoiding the defiance of a rebel,
resolved upon giving Za Selassé battle, who, being an able general,
knew well the danger he would incur by delay.

It was October 13th 1704 that the king, after drawing up his army in
order of battle, placing 200 Portuguese, with a number of Abyssinian
troops, on the right, took to himself the charge of the left, and
called for Peter Paez to give him absolution; but that Jesuit was
occupied at a convenient distance in Tigré, by his exorcisms destroying
ants, butterflies, mice, locusts, and various other enemies, of much
more importance, in his opinion, than the life of a king who had
been blindly, but directly conducted to slaughter by his fanatical
preachings.

The battle began with great appearance of success. On the right, the
Portuguese, led by old and veteran officers, destroyed and overturned
every thing before them with their fire-arms: but on the left, where
the king commanded, things went otherwise, for the whole of this
division fled, excepting a body of nobility, his own officers and
companions, who remained with him, and fought manfully in his defence.
Above all, the king himself, trained to a degree of excellence in the
use of arms, strong and agile in body, in the flower of his age, and
an excellent horseman, performed feats of valour that seemed above the
power of man: but he and his attendants being surrounded by the whole
army of Za Selassé, and decreasing in number, were unable to support
any longer such disadvantage.

Laeca Mariam, solicitous only for the king’s safety, charging furiously
every one that approached, was thrust through with a lance by a common
soldier who had approached him unobserved. The king, desirous only
to avenge his death, threw himself like lightning into the opposite
squadron, and received a stroke with a lance in his breast, which
threw him from his horse on the ground. Grievous as the wound was,
he instantly recovered himself, and, drawing his sword, continued to
fight with as much vigour as ever. He was now hemmed in by a ring of
soldiers, part of whom, afraid of encountering him, remained at a
distance, throwing missile weapons without good direction or strength,
as if they had been hunting some fierce wild beast. Others, wishing to
take him prisoner, abstained from striking him, out of regard to his
character and dignity; but the traitor, Za Selassé, coming up at that
instant, and seeing the king almost fainting with fatigue, and covered
with wounds, pointed his lance, and, spurring his horse, furiously
struck him in the middle of the forehead, which blow threw the king
senseless to the ground, where he was afterwards slain with many
wounds.

The battle ended with the death of Za Denghel; many saw him fall, and
more his body after the defeat; but no one chose to be the first that
should in any way dispose of it, or care to own that they knew it. It
lay in this abject state for three days, till it was buried by three
peasants in a corner of the plain, in a little building like a chapel
(which I have seen) not above six feet high, under the shade of a very
fine tree, in Abyssinia called _sassa_: there it lay till ten years
after, when Socinios removed it from that humble mausoleum, and buried
it in a monastery called Daga, in the lake Dembea, with great pomp and
magnificence.

The grief which the death of Za Denghel occasioned was so universal,
and the odium it brought upon the authors of it so great, that neither
Za Selassé nor Ras Athanasius dared for a time take one step towards
naming a successor, which the fear of Za Denghel, and the uncertainty
of victory, had prevented them from doing by common consent before the
battle. There was no doubt but that the election would fall upon Jacob,
but he was far off, confined in the mountainous country of Caffa in
Narea. The distance was great; the particular place uncertain; the way
to it lay through deserts, always dangerous on account of the Galla,
and often impassable.

[Illustration]




JACOB.

From 1604 to 1605.

    _Makes Proposals to Socinios, which are rejected--Takes the
    Field--Bad Conduct and Defeat of Za Selassé--Battle of Debra
    Zeit--Jacob defeated and slain._


During the interim, Socinios appeared in Amhara, not as one
offering himself as a candidate to be supported by the strength and
interest of others, but like a conqueror at the head of a small but
well-disciplined army of veteran troops, ready to compel by force those
who should refuse to swear allegiance to him from conviction of his
right.

The first step he took was to send Bela Christos, a nobleman of known
worth, to Ras Athanasius then in Gojam, stating to him his pretensions
to succeed Za Denghel in the kingdom, desiring his assistance with his
army, and declaring that he would acknowledge the service done him as
soon as it was in his power. Without waiting for an answer, at the head
of his little army he passed the Nile, and entered Gojam. He then sent
a second message to Ras Athanasius, acquainting him that he was at
hand, and ordering him to prepare to receive him as his sovereign.

This abrupt and confident conduct of Socinios very much disconcerted
Ras Athanasius. He had as yet concerted nothing with his friend Za
Selassé, and it was now late to do it. There was no person then within
the bounds of the empire that solicited the crown but Socinios, and
he was now at hand, and very much favoured by the soldiers. For these
reasons, he thought it best to put a good face upon the matter in his
present situation. He, therefore, met Socinios as required, and joined
his army, as if it had been his free choice, and saluted him king in
the midst of repeated chearful congratulations of both armies now
united.

Having succeeded in this to his wish, Socinios lost no time to try the
same experiment with Za Selassé, who was then in Dembea, the province
of which he was governor. To him he sent this message, “That God by
his grace having called him to the throne of his ancestors, he was now
on his march to Dembea, where he requested him to prepare his troops
to receive him, and dispose them to deserve the favours that he was
ready to confer upon all of them.” Za Selassé remained for a while as
if thunder-struck by so peremptory an intimation. Of all masters he
most wished for Jacob, because, from experience, he thought he could
govern him. Of all masters he most feared Socinios, because he knew he
possessed capacity and qualities that would naturally determine him to
govern alone. After having concerted with his friends, he sent Socinios
answer, “That not having till now known any thing of his claims or
intentions, he had sent an invitation to Jacob into Narea, whose answer
he expected; but that, in case Jacob did not appear, he then would
receive Socinios with every mark of duty and affection, and hoped he
would grant him the short delay to which he had inadvertently, though
innocently, engaged himself.”

This answer did in no shape please Socinios, who dispatched the
messenger immediately with this declaration, “That he was already king,
and would never cede his right to Jacob, who was deposed and judged
unworthy to reign; no nor even to his father Melec Segued, though he
should rise again from the grave, and claim the throne he had so long
sat upon.”

Za Selasse, easily penetrating that there was no peace in Socinios’s
intentions, first imprisoned the messenger, and, instead of another
answer, marched instantly with his whole army to surprise him before he
had time to take his measures. And in this he succeeded. For Socinios
being at that instant overtaken by sickness, and not knowing what trust
to put in Athanasius’s army, retired in haste to the mountains of
Amhara; while Athanasius also withdrew his troops till he should know
upon what terms he stood both with Za Selassé and the king.

Still no return came from Jacob. The winter was nearly past, and not
only the soldiers, but people of all ranks began to be weary of this
interregnum, and heartily wished for their ancient form of government.
They said, That since Jacob did not appear, there could be no reason
for excluding Socinios, whose title was undoubted, and who had all the
qualities necessary to make a good king.

Za Selasse, seeing this opinion gained ground among his troops, and
fearing they might mutiny and leave him alone, made a virtue of
necessity: he dispatched an ambassador to acknowledge Socinios as his
sovereign, and declare that he was ready to swear allegiance to him.
Socinios received this embassy with great apparent complacency. He
sent in return a monk, in whom he confided, a person of great worth
and dignity, to be his representative, and receive the homage of Za
Selassé and his army. On the news of this monk’s approach, Za Selassé
sent on his part ten men, the most respectable in his camp, to meet
this representative of the king, and conduct him into the camp, where
Za Selassé, and all his troops, did homage, and swore allegiance
to Socinios. Feasts and presents were now given in the camp, as is
usual at the accession of a new king to the throne, and all the army
abandoned themselves to joy.

These good tidings were immediately communicated both to Socinios and
Ras Athanasius. But, in the midst of this rejoicing, a messenger came
from Jacob, informing Za Selassé that he was then in Dembea; that he
had conferred upon him the title of Ras and Betwudet, that is, had
made him the king’s lieutenant-general throughout the whole empire. Za
Selassé, in possession of the height of his wishes, and making an ample
distribution among his troops, determined immediately to march and join
Jacob in Dembea; but first he wrote privately to the ten men that had
accompanied the monk to Socinios, that they should withdraw themselves
as suddenly and privately as possible before the coming of Jacob was
known. Eight of these were lucky enough to do so; two of them were
overtaken in the flight and brought back to Socinios, who ordered them
to immediate execution.

Ras Athanasius, seeing the prosperous turn that Jacob’s affairs had
taken, renounced his oath to Socinios, and repaired to Jacob at Coga,
while Socinios retired into Amhara at the head of a very respectable
army, waiting an opportunity to repay Jacob for his ambition, and
Athanasius and Za Selassé for their treason and perjury towards him.

Although Jacob was now again seated on the throne, surrounded by the
army and great officers of the empire, his mind was always disturbed
with the apprehension of Socinios. In order to free himself from this
anxiety, he employed Socinios’s mother in an application to her son,
with an offer of peace and friendship; promising, besides, that he
would give him in property the kingdoms of Amhara, Walaka, and Shoa,
and all the lands which his father had ever possessed in any other part
of Abyssinia. Socinios shortly answered, “That what God had given him,
no man could take from him; that the whole kingdom belonged to him, nor
would he ever relinquish any part of it but with his life. He advised
Jacob to consider this, and peaceably resign a crown which did not
belong to him; and the attempting to keep which, would involve him and
his country in a speedy destruction.”

Upon this defiance, seeing Socinios implacable, Jacob took the field,
and was followed by Za Selassé. But this proud and insolent traitor,
who never could confine himself within the line of his duty, even under
a king of his own choosing, would not join his forces with Jacob, but
vain-gloriously led a separate army, subject to his orders alone. In
this manner, having separate camps, choosing different ground, and
sometimes at a considerable distance from each other, they came up
with Socinios in Begemder. Jacob advanced so near him that his tent
could be distinctly seen from that of Socinios, and, on the morrow,
Jacob and Za Selassé, drawing up their armies, offered Socinios battle.

That wise prince saw too well that he was overmatched; and, though
he desired a battle as much as Jacob, it was not upon such terms as
the present. He declined it, and kept hovering about them as near as
possible on the heights and uneven ground, where he could not be forced
to fight till it perfectly suited his own interest.

This refusal on the part of Socinios did but increase Za Selassé’s
pride. He despised Jacob as a general, and thought that Socinios
declining battle was owing only to the apprehension he had of his
presence, courage, and abilities. He continued parading with the
separate army, perfectly intoxicated with confidence and an imaginary
superiority, neglecting all the wholesome rules of war rigidly adhered
to by great generals for the sake of discipline, however distant they
may be from their enemy.

It was not long before this was told Socinios, who soon saw his
advantage in it, and thereupon resolved to fight Za Selassé singly,
and watch attentively till he should find him as far as possible
from Jacob. Nor did he long wait for the occasion; for Za Selassé,
attempting to lead his army through very uneven and stony ground,
called _the Pass of Mount Defer_, and at a considerable distance from
Jacob, Socinios attacked him while in the pass so rudely, that his
army, entangled in broken and unknown ground, was surrounded and almost
cut to pieces. Za Selassé, with a few followers, saved themselves by
the goodness of their horses, and joined the king, being the first
messengers of their own defeat.

Jacob received the news of this misfortune without any apparent
concern. On the contrary, he took Za Selassé roundly to task for
having lost such an army by his misconduct; and from that time put on
a coolness of carriage towards him that could not be bruiked by such
a character. He made direct proposals to Socinios to join him, if he
could be assured that his services would be well received. Socinios,
though he reposed no confidence in one that had changed sides so often,
was yet, for his own sake, desirous to deprive his rival of an officer
of such credit and reputation with the soldiers. He therefore promised
him a favourable reception; and, a treaty being concluded, Socinios
marched into Gojam, followed by Jacob, and there was joined by Za
Selassé whom Jacob had made governor of that province.

Jacob, not knowing how far this desertion might extend, and to shew
Socinios the little value he set upon his new acquisition, immediately
advanced towards him, and offered him battle. This was what Socinios
very earnestly wished for; but, as his army was much inferior to
Jacob’s, he seemed to decline it from motives of fear, till he had
found ground proper for his army to engage in with advantage.

Jacob, sensible of the great superiority he had, (historians say it
was nearly thirty to one) grew every day more impatient to bring
Socinios to an engagement, fearing he might retreat, and thereby
prolong the war, which he had no doubt would be finished by the first
action. Therefore he was anxious to keep him always in sight, without
regarding the ground through which his eagerness led him. Several days
the two armies marched side by side in sight of each other, till they
came to Debra Tzait, or the Mountain of Olives. There Jacob halted; he
then advanced a little further, and seeing Socinios encamped, he did
the same in a low and very disadvantageous post on the banks of the
river Lebart.

Socinios having now obtained his desire, early in the morning of the
10th of March 1607 fell suddenly upon Jacob cooped up in a low and
narrow place, which gave him no opportunity of availing himself of his
numbers. Jacob soon found that he was over-reached by the superior
generalship of his enemy. Socinios’s troops were so strongly posted,
that Jacob’s soldiers found themselves in a number of ambushes they
had not foreseen, so that, fighting or flying being equally dangerous
to them, his whole army was nearly destroyed in the field, or in the
flight, which was most ardently and vigorously followed till night,
with little loss on the part of Socinios.

This battle, decisive enough by the route and dispersion of the enemy,
became still more so from two circumstances attending it: The first was
the death of his competitor, who fell unknown among a herd of common
soldiers in the beginning of the action, without having performed, in
his own person, any thing worthy of the character he had to sustain,
or that could enable any spectator to give an account in what place
he fell; the consequence of which was, that he was thought to be
alive many years afterwards. The second was the death of the Abuna
Petros. This priest had distinguished himself in Za Denghel’s reign,
by absolving the king’s subjects and soldiers from their oaths of
allegiance, which was followed by the unfortunate death of Za Denghel
in the plain of Bartcho. Vain of the importance he had acquired by the
success of his treason, he had pursued the same conduct with regard
to Socinios, and followed Jacob to battle, where, trusting to his
character and habit for the safety of his person, he neglected the
danger that he ran amidst a flying army. While occupied in uttering
vain curses and excommunications against the conquerors, he was known,
by the crucifix he held in his hand, by a Moorish soldier of Socinios,
who thrust him through with a lance, then cut his head off, and carried
it to the king.

The Abyssinian annals state, that, immediately after seeing the head
of Abuna Peter, Socinios ordered a retreat to be sounded, and that no
more of his enemies should be slain. On the contrary, the Jesuits have
said, that the pursuit was continued even after night; for that a body
of horse, among whom were many Portuguese belonging to the army of
Jacob, flying from Socinios’s troops, fell over a very high precipice,
it being so dark that they did not discover it; and that one soldier,
called Manuel Gonsalez, finding his horse leave him, as it were flying,
lighted luckily on a tree, where, in the utmost trepidation, he sat
all night, not knowing where he was. This fear was greatly encreased
in the morning, when he beheld the horses, and the men who were his
companions, lying dead and dashed to pieces in the plain below.

Ras Athanasius, who had followed the party of Jacob, narrowly escaped
by the swiftness of his horse, and hid himself in the monastery of
Dima, at no great distance from the field of battle; and Peter Paez,
from remembrance of his former good offices, having recommended him
to Sela Christos, Socinios’s brother-in-law, he was pardoned; but
losing favour every day, his effects and lands having been taken
from him on different occasions, he is said at last to have died for
want, justly despised by all men for unsteadiness in allegiance to
his sovereigns, by which he had been the occasion of the death of two
excellent princes, had frequently endangered the life and state of
the third, and had been the means of the slaughter of many thousands
of their subjects, worthier men than himself, as they fell in the
discharge of their duty. But before his death he had still this further
mortification, that his wife, daughter of Sertza Denghel, called Melec
Segued, voluntarily forsook his bed and retired to a single life.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




SOCINIOS, OR MELEC SEGUED.

From 1605 to 1632.

    _Socinios embraces the Romish Religion--War with Sennaar--With
    the Shepherds--Violent Conduct of the Romish Patriarch--Lasta
    rebels--Defeated at Wainadega--Socinios restores the
    Alexandrian Religion--Resigns his Crown to his eldest Son._


Socinios, now universally acknowledged as king, began his reign with a
degree of moderation which there was no reason to expect of him. Often
as he had been betrayed, many and inveterate as his enemies were, now
he had them in his power, he sought no vengeance for injuries which
he had suffered, but freely pardoned every one, receiving all men
graciously without reproach or reflections, or even depriving them of
their employments.

Being informed, however, that one Mahardin, a Moor, had been the first
to break through that respect due to a king, by wounding Za Denghel at
the battle of Bartcho, he ordered him to be brought at noon-day before
the gate of his palace, and his head to be there struck off with an
ax, as a just atonement for violated majesty.

The king, now retired to Coga, gave his whole attention to regulate
those abuses, and repair those losses, which this long and bloody
war had occasioned. He had two brothers by the mother’s side, men of
great merit, Sela Christos, and Emana Christos, destined to share the
principal part in the king’s confidence and councils.

Bela Christos, a man of great family, who had been attached to him
since he formed his first pretensions to the crown, was called to
court to take his share in the glory and dangers of this reign, which
it was easy to see would be a very active one; for every province
around was full of rebels and independents, who had shaken off the
yoke of government, paid no taxes, nor shewed other respect to the
king than just what at the moment consisted with their own interest or
inclination.

The Portuguese soldiers, remnants of the army which came into Abyssinia
under Christopher de Gama, had multiplied exceedingly, and their
children had been trained by their parents in the use of fire-arms.
They were at this time incorporated in one body under John Gabriel a
veteran officer, who seems to have constantly remained with the king,
while his soldiers (at least great part of them) had followed the
fortune they thought most likely to prevail ever since the time of
Claudius.

Menas did not esteem them enough to keep them in his army at the
expence of enduring the seditious conversations of their priests
reviling and undervaluing his religion and government. He therefore
banished them the kingdom; but, instead of obeying, they joined the
Baharnagash, then confederated with the Turks and in rebellion against
his sovereign, as we have already mentioned. Sertza Denghel seems to
have scarcely set any value upon them after this, and made very little
use of them during his long reign. Upon the infant Jacob’s being put
upon the throne they all adhered to him; and, after Jacob’s banishment,
part of them had attached themselves to Za Denghel, and behaved with
great spirit in the battle of Bartcho.

Upon Jacob’s restoration they had joined him, and with him were
defeated at the decisive battle of Lebart, being all united against
Socinios; so that, on whatever side they declared themselves, they
were constantly beaten by the cowardice of the Abyssinians with whom
they were joined. Yet, tho’ they had been so often on the side that
was unfortunate, their particular loss had been always inconsiderable;
because, whatever was the fate of the rest of the army, none of the
country troops would ever stand before them, and they made their
retreat from amidst a routed army in nearly the same safety as if they
had been conquerors; because it was not, for several reasons, the
interest of the conquerors to attack them, nor was the experiment ever
likely to be an eligible one to the assailants.

Socinios followed a conduct opposite to that of Menas. He determined to
attach the Portuguese wholly to himself, and to make them depend upon
him entirely. For this reason he made great advances to their priests,
and sent for Peter Paez to court, where, after the usual disputes upon
the pope’s supremacy, and the two natures in Christ, mass was said,
and a sermon preached, much with the same success as it had been in the
time of Za Denghel, and with full as great offence to the Abyssinian
clergy.

The province of Dembea, lying round the lake Tzana, is the most fertile
and the most cultivated country in Abyssinia. It is entirely flat,
and seems to have been produced by the decrease of water in the lake,
which, from very visible marks, appears to have formerly been of four
times the extent of what it is at present. Dembea, however fruitful,
has one inconvenience to which all level countries in this climate are
subject: A mortal fever rages in the whole extent of it, from March to
Heder Michael, the eighth day of November, when there are always gentle
showers. This dangerous fever stops immediately upon the falling of
these rains, as suddenly as the plague does upon the first falling of
the nucta, or dew, in Egypt.

On the south side of this lake the country rises into a rocky
promontory, which forms a peninsula and runs far into the lake. Nothing
can be more beautiful than this small territory, elevated, but not
to an inconvenient height, above the water which surrounds it on all
sides, except the south. The climate is delightful, and no fevers
or other diseases rage here. The prospect of the lake and distant
mountains is magnificent beyond European conception, and Nature seems
to have pointed this place out for pleasure, health, and retirement.
Paez had asked and obtained this territory from the king, who, he says,
gave him a grant of it in perpetuity. The manner of this he describes:
“A civil officer is sent on the part of the king, who calls together
all the proprietors of the neighbouring lands, and visits the bounds
with them; they kill a goat at particular distances, and bury the heads
under ground upon the boundary line of this regality; which heads, Paez
says, it is felony to dig up or remove; and this is a mark or gift of
land in perpetuity.”

Without contradicting the form of burying the goats heads, I shall only
say, I never saw or heard of it, nor is there such a thing as a gift
of land in _perpetuum_ known in Abyssinia. All the land is the king’s;
he gives it to whom he pleases during pleasure, and resumes it when it
is his will. As soon as he dies the whole land in the kingdom (that of
the Abuna excepted) is in the disposal of the crown; and not only so,
but, by the death of every present owner, his possessions, however long
enjoyed, revert to the king, and do not fall to the eldest son. It is
by proclamation the possession and property is reconveyed to the heir,
who thereby becomes absolute master of the land for his own life or
pleasure of the king, under obligation of military and other services;
and that exception, on the part of the Abuna, is not in respect to
the sanctity of his person, or charge, but because it is founded upon
treaty[47], and is become part of the constitution.

The Abyssinians saw, with the utmost astonishment, the erection of a
convent strongly built with stone and lime, of which before they had no
knowledge, and their wonder was still increased, when, at desire of the
king, Paez undertook, of the same materials, to build a palace for him
at the southmost end of this peninsula, which is called Gorgora. It was
with amazement mixed with terror that they saw a house rise upon house,
for so they call the different storeys.

Paez here displayed his whole ingenuity, and the extent of his
abilities. He alone was architect, mason, smith, and carpenter,
and with equal dexterity managed all the instruments used by each
profession in the several stages of the work. The palace was what
we shall call wainscoted with cedar, divided into state-rooms, and
private apartments likewise for the queen and nobility of both sexes
that formed the court, with accommodations and lodgings for guards and
servants.

As the king had at that time a view to attack the rebels, the Agows
and Damots, and to check the inroads of the Galla into Gojam, he
saw with pleasure a work going on that provided the most commodious
residence where his occupation in all probability was chiefly to lie.
His principal aim was to bring into his kingdom a number of Portuguese
troops, which, joined to those already there, and the converts he
proposed to make after embracing the Catholic religion, might enable
him to extirpate that rebellious spirit which seemed now universally
to have taken possession of the hearts of his subjects, and especially
of the clergy, of late taught, he did not seem to know how, that most
dangerous privilege of cursing and excommunicating kings. He had not
seen in Peter Paez and his fellow-priests any thing but submission, and
a love of monarchy; their lives and manners were truly apostolical; and
he never thought, till he came afterwards to be convinced upon proof,
that the patriarch from Rome, and the Abuna from Cairo, tho’ they
differed in their opinion as to the two natures in Christ, did both
heartily agree in the desire of erecting ecclesiastical dominion and
tyranny upon the ruins of monarchy and civil power, and of effecting a
total subordination of the civil government, either to the chairs of St
Mark or St Peter.

In the winter, during the cessation from work, Socinios called Paez
from Gorgora to Coga, where he enlarged the territory the Jesuits
then had at Fremona. After which he declared to him his resolution
to embrace the Catholic religion; and, as Paez says, presented him
with two letters, one to the king of Portugal, the other to the pope:
the first dated the 10th of December 1607, the latter the 14th of
October of the same year. These letters say not a word of his intended
conversion, nor of submission to the see of Rome; but complain only of
the disorderly state of his kingdom, and the constant inroads of the
Galla, earnestly requesting a number of Portuguese soldiers to free
them from their yoke, as formerly, under the conduct of Christopher de
Gama, they had delivered Abyssinia from that of the Moors.

While these things passed at Coga, two pieces of intelligence were
brought to the king, both very material in themselves, but which
affected him very differently. The first was, that the traitor Za
Selassé, while making one of his incursions into Gojam, had fallen into
an ambush laid for him by the Toluma Galla, guardians of that province
on the banks of the Nile, and that these Pagans had slain him and cut
off his head, which they then presented to the king, who ordered it to
be exposed on the lance whereon it was fixed, in the most conspicuous
place in the front of his palace.

This was the end of Ras Za Selassé, a name held in detestation to
this day throughout all Abyssinia. Though his death was just such as
it ought to have been, yet, as it was in an advanced time of life, he
still became a hurtful example, by shewing that it was possible for a
man to live to old age in the continual practice of murder and treason.

He was of low birth, as I have already observed, of a Pagan nation
of Troglodytes, of the lowest esteem in Abyssinia, employed always
in the meanest and most servile occupations, in which capacity he
served first in a private family. Being observed to have an active,
quick turn of mind, he was preferred to the service of Melec Segued,
upon whose death he was so much esteemed by his son Jacob, for the
expertness and capacity he shewed in business, that he gave him large
possessions, and appointed him afterwards to several ranks in the army;
having regularly advanced through the subordinate degrees of military
command, always with great success, he was made at last general; and
being now of importance sufficient to be able to ruin his benefactor,
he joined Ras Athanasius, who had rebelled against Jacob, by whom he
was taken prisoner, and, being mercifully dealt with, only banished
to Narea. From this disgraceful situation he was freed by Za Denghel,
who conferred upon him the most lucrative important employment in
the state. In return, he rebelled against Za Denghel; and at Bartcho
deprived him of his kingdom and life. Upon Jacob’s accession he was
appointed Betwudet, the first place in Ethiopia, after the king,
and governor of Gojam, one of the largest and richest provinces in
Abyssinia. But he soon after again forsook Jacob, swore allegiance to
Socinios, and joined him.

Not content with all this, he began to form some new designs while
with the court at Coga; and, having said to some of the king’s
servants, over wine, that it was prophesied to him he should kill
three kings, which he had verified in two, and was waiting for the
third, this speech was repeated to Socinios, who ordered Za Selassé to
be apprehended; and, though he most justly deserved death, the king
mercifully commuted his punishment to banishment to the top of Oureé
Amba, which signifies the Great Mountain upon the high ridge, called
_Gusman_, near the banks of the Nile; and, though close confined in
the caves on the top of that mountain, after a year’s imprisonment he
escaped to Walaka, and there declared himself captain of a band of
robbers, with which he infested the province of Gojam, when he was
slain by a peasant, and his head cut off and sent to Socinios, who very
much rejoiced in the present, and disposed of it as we have mentioned.

The second piece of intelligence the emperor received was that in the
mountains of Habab, contiguous to Masuah, where is the famous monastery
of the monks of St Eustathius, called _Bisan_; a person appeared
calling himself Jacob, son of Sertza Denghel, and pretending to have
escaped from the battle of Lebart; thus, taking advantage of the
circumstance of Jacob’s body not having been found in the field among
the dead after that engagement, he pretended he had been so grievously
wounded in the teeth and face that it was not possible to suffer the
deformity to appear; for which reason, as he said, but, as it appeared
afterwards, to conceal the little resemblance he bore to Jacob, he
wrapped about his head the corner of his upper cloth, and so concealed
one side of his face entirely.

All Tigré hastened to join this impostor as their true sovereign;
who, finding himself now at the head of an army, came down from the
mountains of Bisan, and encamped in the neighbourhood of Dobarwa upon
the Mareb, where he had a new accession of strength.

The shape of the crown in Abyssinia is that of the hood, or capa, which
the priests wear when saying mass. It is composed of silver, sometimes
of gold, sometimes of both metals, mixed and lined with blue silk. It
is made to cover part of the forehead, both cheeks, and the hind-part
of the neck likewise to the joining of the shoulders. A crown of this
shape could not but be of great service in hiding the terrible scars
with which the impostor’s face was supposed to be deformed. He had
accordingly got one made at Masuah, beat very thin out of a few ounces
of gold which he had taken from a caravan that he had robbed. He wore
it constantly upon his head as a token that he was not a candidate for
the crown, but real sovereign, who had worn that mark of power from his
infancy.

The news of this impostor, with the usual exaggeration of followers,
soon came to Sela Christos, governor of Tigré, who, seeing that the
affair became more serious every day, resolved to attempt to check it.
He conceived, however, he had little trust to put in the troops of
his province, who all of them were wavering whether they should not
join the rebel. His sole dependence, then, was upon the troops of his
own household, veteran soldiers, well paid and cloathed, and firmly
attached to his person, and likewise upon the Portuguese. Above all,
being himself a man of consummate courage and prudence, he was far from
judging of the power of his enemy by the multitude of rabble which
composed it.

As soon as the armies came in presence of each other, Jacob offered
the governor battle. But no sooner did the impostor’s troops see the
eagerness with which the small but chosen band rushed upon them, than
they fled and dispersed; and though Sela Christos had taken every
precaution to cut off the pretended Jacob from his usual sculking
places, it was not possible to overtake or apprehend him; for he
arrived in safety in one of the highest and most inaccessible mountains
of the district, whence he looked down on Sela Christos and his army
without apprehension, having behind him a retreat to the more distant
and less known mountains of Hamazen, should his enemies press him
further.

As long as Sela Christos remained with his little army in that country,
the impostor Jacob continued on the highest part of the mountains,
accompanied only by two or three of his most intimate friends, who
being people whose families dwelt in the plain below, brought him
constant intelligence of what passed there.

Sela Christos, wishing by all means to engage the enemy, marched into
a considerable plain called _Mai-aquel_; but, seeing on every side the
top of each mountain guarded by troops of soldiers, he was afraid he
had advanced too far; and, apprehensive lest he should be inclosed in
the midst of a multitude so posted, he began to think how he could best
make his retreat before he was surrounded by so numerous enemies. But
they no sooner saw his intention by the movement of his army, than,
leaving their leader as a spectator above, they fell on all sides upon
Sela Christos’s troops, who, having no longer any safety but in their
arms, began to attack the hill that was next them, which they stormed
as they would do a castle. Finding the small resistance that each of
these posts made, the governor divided his small army into so many
separate bodies, leaving his cavalry in the plain below, who, without
fighting, were only employed in slaughtering those his troops had
dislodged from their separate posts.

The day after, the impostor assembling his scattered troops, retreated
towards the sea into the territory of Hamazen, between the country of
the Baharnagash and the mountains of the Habab.

Sela Christos, finding that, while he pursued his victory in these
distant parts, the spirit of rebellion increased nearer home, resolved
to inform the king his brother of the unpromising state of his affairs
in Tigré, and the great necessity there was of his presence there.
Nor did Socinios lose a moment after receiving this intelligence from
Sela Christos, although it had found him, in one respect, very ill
prepared for such an undertaking; for he had sent all his horse from
Coga upon an expedition against the Shangalla and Gongas, nations on
the north-west border of this kingdom; so that, when he marched from
Wainadega, his cavalry amounted to 530 men only, besides a small
reinforcement brought by Emana Christos, governor of Amhara.

It was at Aibo the king turned off the road to Tigré towards Begemder,
and that day encamped at Wainadega. From Wainadega he advanced to
Davada; and, crossing the Reb, he turned off by the way of Zang, and
encamped at Kattamè. He then proceeded to Tzamè, and arrived at Hader.
At this place some spies informed him that an advanced party of the
Galla Marawa were strongly lodged in a hill not far off. Upon receiving
this notice, Socinios ordered his army to refresh themselves, to
extinguish all lights, and march with as little noise as possible.

While it was scarce dawn of day, a strong detachment of the king’s
army surrounded the hill where the Galla were, and found there a small
number of these savages placed like piquets to give the alarm and
prevent surprise. Eleven Galla were slain, and their heads cut off and
carried to the king, the first fruits of his expedition.

Resolving to profit by this early advantage, Socinios followed with all
diligence, and came in sight of the army of the enemy, without their
having taken the smallest alarm. They were lying closely and securely
in their huts that they had made. A large ravine full of trees and
stumps divided the two armies, and in part concealed them from each
other. The king ordered Emana Christos, and Abeton Welleta Christos,
to pass the ravine with the horse, and fall upon the Galla suddenly,
throwing the heads of those of the advanced guard they had cut off on
the ground towards them.

Before the king’s horse had passed the ravine, the Galla were alarmed,
and mounted on horseback. As they never fight in order, it required no
time to form; but they received the king’s cavalry so rudely, that,
though Emana Christos and the young prince behaved with the utmost
courage, they were beat back, and obliged to fly with considerable
loss, being entangled in the bushes. No sooner did the king observe
that his horse were engaged, than he ordered his troops to pass
the ravine to support them, and was desirous to bring on a general
engagement. But a panic had seized his troops. They would not stir, but
seemed benumbed and overcome by the cold of the morning, spectators of
the ruin of the cavalry.

Emana Christos, and those of the cavalry that had escaped the massacre,
had repassed the ravine, and dispersed themselves in the front of the
foot; while the victorious Marawa, like ignorant savages, pushed their
victory to the very front of the king’s line. Socinios, ordering all
the drums of the army to beat and trumpets to sound, to excite some
spirit in his troops, advanced himself before any of his soldiers, and
slew the first Galla within his reach with his own hands. The example
and danger the king exposed himself to, raised the indignation of
the troops. They poured in crowds, without regarding order, upon the
Marawa, great part of whom had already passed the ravine, and all that
had passed it were cut to pieces.

The Galla, unable to stand this loss, fled from the field, and
immediately after left Begemder. The want of horse on the king’s part
saved their whole army from the destruction which would infallibly have
been the consequence of a vigorous pursuit, through a country where
every inhabitant was an enemy. The king after this returned to his
palace at Coga to finish the business he had in hand.

In the mean time, a report was spread through all Tigré, that the king
had been defeated by the Galla, and that Ras Sela Christos had repaired
to Gondar in consequence of that disaster. The impostor Jacob lost no
time in taking advantage of this report. He descended from his natural
fortress, and, in conjunction with the governor of Axum, slew several
people, and committed many ravages in Siré. The Ras no sooner learned
that he was encamped on plain ground, than he presented himself with
the little army he had before; and, though the odds against him were
excessive, yet by his presence and conduct, the rebels, though they
fought this time with more than ordinary obstinacy, were defeated with
great loss, and their leader, the supposed Jacob, forced again to his
inaccessible mountains.

Socinios having now finished the affairs which detained him at Coga,
and being informed that the southern Galla, resenting the defeat of
the Marawa, had entered into a league to invade Abyssinia with united
forces, and a complete army to burn and lay waste the whole country
between the Tacazzé and Tzana, and to attack the emperor in his capital
of Coga, which they were determined to destroy, sent orders to Kasmati
Julius, his son-in-law, to join him immediately with what forces
he had, as also to Kesla Christos; and, being joined by both these
officers and their troops, he marched and took post at Ebenaat in the
district of Belessen, in the way by which the Galla intended to pass to
the capital, and he resolved to await them there.

The Galla advanced in their usual manner, burning and destroying
churches and villages, and murdering without mercy all that were so
unfortunate as to fall into their hands. The king bore these excesses
of his enemy with the patience of a good general, who saw they
contributed to his advantage. He therefore did not offer to check any
of their disorders, but by not resisting rather hoped to encourage
them. He had an army in number superior, and this was seldom the case;
but in quality there was no comparison, five of the king’s troops being
equal to twenty of the enemy, and this was the general proportion in
which they fought. He, therefore, contented himself with choosing
proper ground to engage, and improving it by ambushes such as the
nature of the field permitted or suggested.

It was the 7th of January 1608, early in the morning, that the Galla
presented themselves to Socinios in battle, in a plain below Ebenaat,
surrounded with small hills covered with wood. The Galla filled the
whole plain, as if voluntarily devoting themselves to destruction, and
from the hills and bushes were destroyed by fire-arms from enemies
they did not see, who with a strong body took possession of the place
through which they entered, and by which they were to return no more.

Socinios that day, for what particular reason does not appear,
distinguished himself among the midst of the Galla, by fighting like a
common soldier. It is thought by the historians of those times, that he
had received advice while at Coga, that his son-in-law Julius intended
to rebel, and therefore he meant to discourage him by comparison of
their personal abilities. This, however, is not probable; the king’s
character was established, and nothing more could be added to it.
However that may be, all turned to the disadvantage of the Galla. No
general or other officer thought himself entitled to spare his person
more than the king; all fought like common soldiers; and, being the
men best armed and mounted, and most experienced in the field, they
contributed in proportion to the slaughter of the day. About 12,000 men
on the part of the Galla were killed upon the spot; the very few that
remained were destroyed by the peasants, whilst 400 men only fell on
the part of the king, so it was a massacre rather than a battle.

Socinios now resolved to try his fortune against the impostor Jacob,
and with that resolution he crossed Lamalmon, descending to the Tacazzé
in his way to Siré. Here, as on the frontiers of his province, he was
met by Sela Christos, who brought Peter Paez along with them. Both were
kindly received by the king, who encamped in the large plain before
Axum, in consequence of a resolution he had long taken of being crowned
with all the ancient ceremonies used on this occasion by former kings,
while the royal residence was in the province of Tigré.

It was on the 18th of March, according to their account, the day of
our Saviour’s first coming to Jerusalem, that this festival began. His
army consisted of about 30,000 men. All the great officers, all the
officers of state, and the court then present, were every man dressed
in the richest and gayest manner. Nor was the other sex behind-hand in
the splendour of their appearance. The king, dressed in crimson damask,
with a great chain of gold round his neck, his head bare, mounted upon
a horse richly caparisoned, advanced at the head of his nobility,
passed the outer court, and came to the paved way before the church.
Here he was met by a number of young girls, daughters of the umbares,
or supreme judges, together with many noble virgins standing on the
right and left of the court.

Two of the noblest of these held in their hands a crimson cord of
silk, somewhat thicker than common whip-cord, but of a looser texture,
stretched across from one company to another, as if to shut up the
road by which the king was approaching the church. When this cord was
prepared and drawn tight about breast-high by the girls, the king
entered, advancing at a moderate pace, curvetting and shewing the
management of his horse. He was stopped by the tension of this string,
while the damsels on each side asking who he was, were answered, “I am
your king, the king of Ethiopia.” To which they replied with one voice,
“You shall not pass; you are not our king.”

The king then retires some paces, and then presents himself as to
pass, and the cord is again drawn across his way by the young women
so as to prevent him, and the question repeated, “Who are you?” The
king answered, “I am your king, the king of Israel.” But the damsels
resolved, even on this second attack, not to surrender but upon their
own terms; they again answer, “You shall not pass; you are not our
king.”

The third time, after retiring, the king advances with a pace and air
more determined; and the cruel virgins, again presenting the cord and
asking who he is, he answers, “I am your king, the king of Sion;” and,
drawing his sword, cuts the silk cord asunder. Immediately upon this
the young women cry, “It is a truth, you are our king; truly you are
the king of Sion.” Upon which they begin to sing Hallelujah, and in
this they are joined by the court and army upon the plain; fire-arms
are discharged, drums and trumpets sound; and the king, amidst these
acclamations and rejoicings, advances to the foot of the stair of the
church, where he dismounts, and there sits down upon a stone, which, by
its remains, apparently was an altar of Anubis, or the dog-star: At his
feet there is a large slab of free-stone, on which is the inscription
mentioned by Poncet, and which shall be quoted hereafter, when I come
to speak of the ruins of Axum.

After the king comes the nebrit, or keeper of the book of the law in
Axum, supposed to represent Azarias the son of Zadock; then the twelve
umbares, or supreme judges, who with Azarias accompanied Menilek, the
son of Solomon, when he brought the book of the law from Jerusalem, and
these are supposed to represent the twelve tribes. After these follow
the Abuna at the head of the priests, and the Itchegué at the head of
the monks; then the court, who all pass through the aperture made by
the division of the silk cord, which remains still upon the ground.

The king is first anointed, then crowned, and is accompanied half up
the steps by the singing priests, called Depteras, chanting psalms
and hymns. Here he stops at a hole made for the purpose in one of the
steps, and is there fumigated with incense and myrrh, aloes and cassia.
Divine service is then celebrated; and, after receiving the sacrament,
he returns to the camp, where fourteen days should regularly be spent
in feasting, and all manner of rejoicing and military exercise.

The king is, by the old custom, obliged to give a number of presents,
the particulars of which are stated in the deftar, or treasury-book,
the value, the person to whom they are due, and the time of giving; but
a great part of these are gone into desuetude since the removal of the
court from Tigré, as also many of the offices are now suppressed, and
with them the presents due to them.

The nobles and the court were likewise obliged to give presents to the
king upon that occasion. The present from the governor of Axum is two
lions and a fillet of silk, upon which is wrote, “_Mo Anbasa am Nizilet
Solomon am Negadé Jude_--The lion of the tribe of Judah and race of
Solomon hath overcome;” this serves as a form of investiture of lands
that the king grants, a ribband bearing this inscription being tied
round the head of the person to whom the lands are given.

This governor was then in rebellion, so did not assist at the ceremony.
Notwithstanding the difference of expence which I have mentioned, by
suppressing places, presents, and dues, the king Tecla Haimanout told
me at Gondar, that when he was in Tigré, driven there by the late
rebellion, Ras Michael had some thoughts of having him crowned there
in contempt of his enemies; but, by the most moderate calculation that
could be made, not to turn the ceremony into ridicule by parsimony,
it would have cost 20,000 ounces of gold, or L. 50,000 Sterling; upon
which he laid aside the thoughts of it, saying to the king, “Sir,
trust to me, 20,000 ounces of Tigré iron shall crown you better; if
more is wanted, I will bestow it upon your enemies with pleasure till
they are satisfied;” meaning the iron balls with which his soldiers
loaded their musquets.

After the coronation was over, the king passed the Mareb, desiring to
finish his campaign by the death of his competitor Jacob; but that
impostor knew too well the superiority of his rival, and hid himself
in the inmost recesses, without other attendants than a few goats, who
furnished him with their milk, as well as their society.

Socinios left the affair of the rebel Jacob to be ended by Amsala
Christos, an officer of great prudence, whom he made governor of Tigré;
and, taking his brother Ras Sela Christos along with him, returned
to Coga[48]. Amsala Christos being seized with a grievous sickness,
saw how vain it was for him to pursue the suppression of a rebellion
conducted by such a head as this impostor Jacob, and therefore secretly
applied to two young men, Zara Johannes and Amha Georgis, brothers, and
sons of the Shum Welled Georgis, who had committed murder, and were
outlawed by Socinios, and, keeping hid in the mountains, had joined in
fellowship with the impostor Jacob.

These, gained by the promise of pardon given them by Amsala Christos,
chose an opportunity which their intimacy gave them, and, falling upon
Jacob unawares in his retirement, they slew him, cut his head off,
and sent it to the king at Coga, who received it very thankfully, and
returned it to Tigré to Amsala Christos, to be exposed publicly in all
the province to undeceive the people; for it now appeared, that he had
neither scars in his face, broken jaw, nor loss of teeth, but that the
covering was intended only to conceal the little resemblance he bore to
king Jacob, slain, as we have seen, at the battle of Lebart; and he was
now found to have been a herdsman, in those very mountains of Bisan to
which he had so often fled for refuge while his rebellion lasted.

The king, in his return from Tigré, passing by Fremona, sent to the
Jesuits there thirty ounces of gold, about L. 75 Sterling, for their
immediate exigency; testifying, in the most gracious manner, his
regret, “That the many affairs in which he was engaged had prevented
him from hearing mass in their convent, as he very sincerely wished to
do; but he left with them the Abuna Simon, to whom he had recommended
to study their religion, and be a friend to it.”

In this he shewed his want of penetration and experience; for though he
had seen wars between soldier and soldier, who, after having been in
the most violent state of enmity, had died in defence of each other as
friends, he was not aware of that degree of enmity which reigns upon
difference of opinion, not to say religion, between priest and priest.
It was not long, however, before he saw it, and the example was in the
person of his present friend the Abuna Simon.

While Socinios was yet in Tigré, news were brought to Coga from Woggora
to Sanuda Tzef Leham[49] of Dembea, who could not accompany the king
to Tigré on account of sickness, but was left with the charge of the
capital and palace during the king’s absence, that Melchizedec, one
of the meanest and lowest servants of the late king Melec Segued, had
rebelled, and was collecting troops, consisting of soldiers, servants,
and dependents of that prince, and had slain some of Socinios’s
servants. Sanuda was a brave and active officer; but, being without
troops, (the king having carried the whole army to Tigré) immediately
set out from Maitsha to the town of Tchelga, one of the frontiers of
Abyssinia, possessed by Wed Ageeb prince of the Arabs.

It is here to be observed, that though the territorial right of Tchelga
did then, and does still appertain to the kingdom of Abyssinia,
yet the possession of it is ceded by agreement to Wed Ageeb, under
whose protection the caravans from Egypt and Sennaar, and those from
Abyssinia to Sennaar and Egypt, were understood to be ever since they
were cut off in the last century by the basha of Suakem, for this
purpose, that a customhouse might be erected, and the duties divided
between the two kingdoms equally. The same is the case with Serké, a
town belonging to Sennaar, ceded for the same purpose to the king of
Abyssinia.

It happened that Abdelcader[50], son of Ounsa, late king of Sennaar, or
of Funge, as he is called in the Abyssinian annals, had been deposed
by his subjects in the 4th year of his reign, and remained at Tchelga
under the mutual protection of Wed Ageeb and the emperor of Abyssinia,
a kind of prisoner to them both; and had brought with him a number of
soldiers and dependents, the partakers of his former good fortune, who,
finding safety and good usage at Tchelga, were naturally well-affected
to the king. These, ready mounted and armed, joined Sanuda immediately
upon his declaring the exigency; and with these he marched straight to
Coga, to the defence of the palace with which he had been intrusted.

Melchizedec, whose design was against Coga, no sooner heard Sanuda was
arrived there than he marched to surprise him, and a very bloody and
obstinate engagement followed. The Funge, piqued in honour to render
this service to their protector, fought so obstinately that they were
all slain, and Sanuda, mounted that day upon a fleet horse belonging to
Socinios, escaped with difficulty, much wounded.

As soon as Socinios heard of this misfortune, he sent Ras Emana
Christos, who marched straight to Woggora, creating Zenobius, son of
Imael, governor of that district; and there he found Sanuda Zenobius
and Ligaba Za Denghel together, in a place called Deberasso.

As soon as the rebel Melchizedec heard Emana Christos was come, and
with him the fore-mentioned noblemen, he set himself to exert the
utmost of his power to draw together forces of all kinds from every
part he could get them, and his army was soon increased to such a
degree as, notwithstanding the presence of Emana Christos, to strike
terror into all the territory and towns of Dembea. Nothing was wanted
but a king of the royal race for whom to fight. Without a chief of this
kind, it was evident that the army, however often successful, would
at last disperse. They, therefore, brought one Arzo, a prince of the
royal blood, from his hiding-place in Begemder. Arzo, in return for a
throne, conferred the place of Ras upon Melchizedec. Za Christos, son
of Hatzir Abib, was appointed to the command of the army under him;
and, having finished this and many such necessary preparatives, they
marched straight to meet Emana Christos, with a better countenance than
rebel armies generally bear.

It was the 9th of March 1611, at 9 in the morning, when the two armies
were first in sight of each other, nor did they long delay coming to
an engagement. The battle was very obstinate and bloody; Melchizedec
re-established his character for worth, at least as a soldier; the same
did Za Christos. Of the competitor Arzo, history makes no mention; his
blood, probably, was too precious to risk the spilling of it, being so
far-fetched as from king Solomon. After a most obstinate resistance,
part of Za Christos’s army was broken and put to flight; but it rallied
so often, and sold the ground it yielded so dear, that it gave time to
Emana Christos to come up to his army’s assistance.

The Ras, who was as brave a soldier as he was a wise and prudent
general, saw it was a time when all should be risked, and threw himself
into the midst of his enemies; and he was now arrived near the place
where Melchizedec fought, when that rebel, seeing him advancing so fast
among his slaughtered followers, guessing his intention, declined the
combat, turned his horse and fled, while affairs even yet appeared in
his favour. This panic of the general had the effect it ordinarily has
in barbarous armies. Nobody considered how the prospect of the general
issue stood; they fled with Melchizedec, and lost more men than would
have secured them victory had they stood in their ranks.

A body of troops, joined by some peasants of Begemder, pursued
Melchizedec so closely that they came up with him and took him
prisoner, together with Tensa Christos, a very active partizan, and
enemy to Emana Christos. Having brought them to the camp, before
the Ras returned to Coga, they were tried and condemned to die for
rebellion, as traitors, and the sentence immediately executed, after
which their heads were sent to the king. Very soon after this, Arzo,
and his general Za Christos, were taken and sent to the king, who
ordered them to be tried by the judges in common form, and they
underwent the same fate.

The king was employed in the winter season while he resided at Coga,
in building a new church, called St Gabriel. But the season of taking
the field being come, he marched out with his army and halted at
Gogora, sending Emana Christos and Sela Christos against the rebels;
these were not in a particular clan, or province, for all the country
was in rebellion, from the head of the Nile round, eastward, to the
frontiers of Tigré. Part of them indeed were not in arms, but refused
to pay their quota of the revenue; part of them were in arms, and would
neither pay, nor admit a governor from the king among them; others
willingly submitted to Socinios, and were armed, only thereby to
exempt themselves from payment.

Sela Christos fell upon the inhabitants of the mountainous district
of Gusman, on the Nile, whose principal strong-hold, Oureé Amba, he
forced, killing many, and carrying away their children as slaves,
which, upon the intercession of Peter Paez, were given to the Jesuits
to be educated as Catholics.

The next attempt was upon the Gongas, a black Pagan nation, with which
he had the same success; the rest were the Agows, a very numerous
people, all confederates and in arms, and not willing to hear of any
composition. The king ordered one of these tribes, the Zalabassa, to
be extirpated as far as possible, and their country laid waste. But
notwithstanding this example, which met with great interruption in
the execution, the Agows continued in rebellion for several years
afterwards, but much impoverished and lessened in number by variety of
victories obtained over them.

The two next years were spent in unimportant skirmishes with the Agows
of Damot, and with the Galla, invaders of Gojam. In 1615, the year
after, Tecla Georgis made governor of Samen, and Welled Hawaryar,
shum of Tsalemat[51], were both sent against a rebel who declared
himself competitor for the crown. His name was Amdo. He pretended to
be the late king Jacob, son of Melec Segued; and this character he
gave himself, without the smallest communication with the relations
or connections of that prince. As soon as Assera Christos and Tecla
Garima, servants of Welled Hawaryat, heard of this adventurer, they
surprised him in Tsalemat, and, putting him in irons, confined him in
the house of Assera Christos.

Gideon, king of the Jews, whose residence was on the high mountain of
Samen, upon hearing that Amdo was prisoner, sent a body of armed men
who surprised Assera Christos in his own house in the night, and killed
him, bringing with them his prisoner Amdo to Samen, and delivered him
to Gideon there; who not only took him into protection, but assisted
him in raising an army by every means in his power. There were not
wanting there idle vagabonds and lawless people enough, who fled to
the standard of a prince whose sole view seemed to be murder, robbery,
and all sort of licentiousness. It was not long till Amdo, by the
assistance of Gideon, found himself at the head of an army, strong
enough to leave the mountain, and try his fortune in the plain below,
where he laid waste Shawada, Tsalemat, and all the countries about
Samen which persevered in their duty to the king.

Socinios, upon this, appointed Julius his son-in-law governor of
Woggora, Samen, Waag, and Abbergalé, that is, of all the low countries
from the borders of the Tacazzé to Dembea. Abram, an old officer of
the king, desirous to stop the progress of the rebel, marched towards
him, and offered him battle; but that brave officer had not the success
his intention deserved, for he was defeated and slain; which had such
an effect upon Julius, that, without hazarding his fortune farther,
he sent to beseech the king to march against Amdo with all possible
expedition, as his affairs were become desperate in that part of his
dominions.

The king hereupon marched straight to Woggora, and joined Julius at
Shimbra-Zuggan; thence he descended from Samen, and encamped upon
Tocur-Ohha, (the black river) thence he proceeded to Debil, and then
to Sobra; and from this last station he sent a detachment of his army
to attack a strong mountain called Messiraba, one of the natural
fortresses of Gideon, which was forced by the king’s troops after some
resistance, and the whole inhabitants, without distinction of age or
sex, put to the sword, for such were the orders of the king.

This first success very much disheartened the rebels, for Messiraba
was, by nature, one of the strongest mountains, and it, besides, had
been fortified by art, furnished with plenty of provisions, and a
number of good troops. The next mountain Socinios attacked was Hotchi,
and the third Amba Za Hancassé, where he had the like success, and
treated the inhabitants in the same manner; thence he removed his
army to Seganat, where he met with a very stout resistance; but this
mountain, too, was at last taken, Gideon himself escaping narrowly by
the bravery of his principal general, who, fighting desperately, was
slain by a musqueteer.

The constant success of the king, and the bloody manner in which he
pursued his victory, began to alarm Gideon, lest the end should be the
extirpation of his whole nation. He, therefore, made an overture to
the king, that, if he would pardon him and grant him peace, he would
deliver the rebel Amdo bound into his hands.

The king assented to this, and Amdo was accordingly delivered up; and,
being convicted of rebellion and murder, he was sentenced to be nailed
to a cross, and to remain there till he died. But the terrible cries
and groans which he made while they were fixing him to the cross, so
much shocked the ears of the king, that he ordered him to be taken
down, and his head struck off with an ax, which was executed in the
midst of the camp.

Socinios after this retired to Dancaz, and ordered Kefla governor of
Gojam, and Jonael his master of the household, to march suddenly and
surprise Belaya, a country belonging to the Gongas and Guba, Pagan
nations, on whom, every year, he made war for the sake of taking slaves
for the use of the palace. These two officers, with a large body,
mostly horse, fell unawares upon the savages at Belaya, slaying part,
and bringing away their children. But not content with doing this, they
likewise attacked the two districts of Agows, Dengui and Sankara, then
in peace with the king, and drove away an immense number of cattle,
which the king no sooner heard, than he ordered a strict search to
be made, and the whole cattle belonging to the Agows to be gathered
together, and restored to their respective owners; a piece of justice
which softened the hearts of this people more than all the severities
that had been hitherto used; and the good effects of which were soon
after seen upon the Agows, though it produced something very different
in the conduct of Jonael.

The king this year, 1616, left his capital at the usual time, in the
month of November, and ordered his whole household to attend him. His
intention was against the Galla on the west of Gojam, especially the
tribe called Libo. But this campaign was rendered fruitless by the
death of the king’s eldest son, Kennaffer Christos, a young prince
of great hopes, esteemed both by the king and the people. He had
an excellent understanding, and the most affable manners possible,
to those even whom he did not like; was very fond of the soldiers;
merciful, generous, and liberal; and was thought to be the favourite of
the king his father, who buried him with great pomp in the church of
Debra Roma, built by king Isaac, in the lake Tzana.

In the midst of this mourning, there came a very bloody order[52] from
the king. History barely tells us the fact, but does not assign any
other reason than the wanton manner in which Gideon king of the Jews
had endeavoured to disturb his reign and kingdom, which was thought a
sufficient excuse for it. However this may be, the king gave orders
to Kasmati Julius, Kasmati Welled Hawaryat, Billetana Gueta Jonael,
and Fit-Auraris Hosannah, to extirpate all the Falasha that were in
Foggora, Janfakara, and Bagenarwè, to the borders of Samen; also all
that were in Bagla, and in all the districts under their command,
wherever they could find them; and very few of them escaped, excepting
some who fled with Phineas.

In this massacre, which was a very general one, and executed very
suddenly, fell Gideon king of that people; a man of great reputation,
not only among his subjects, but throughout all Abyssinia, reputed
also immensely rich. His treasures, supposed to be concealed in the
mountains, are the objects of the search of the Abyssinians to this day.

The children of those that were slain were sold for slaves by the king;
and all the Falasha in Dembea, in the low countries immediately in
the king’s power, were ordered upon pain of death to renounce their
religion, and be baptised. To this they consented, seeing there was
no remedy; and the king unwisely imagined, that he had extinguished,
by one blow, the religion which was that of his country long before
Christianity, by the unwarrantable butchery of a number of people whom
he had surprised living in security under the assurance of peace. Many
of them were baptised accordingly, and they were all ordered to plow
and harrow upon the sabbath-day.

The king next sent orders to Sela Christos, and Kefla governor of
Gojam, that, assembling their troops, they should transfer the war into
Bizamo, a province on the south side of the Nile, called also in the
books a kingdom. Through this lies the road of the merchants leading to
Narea. It is inhabited by several clans of Pagans, which together make
the great division of these nations into Boren, and Bertuma Galla[53].

The army passed the Nile, laying waste the whole country, driving off
the cattle, collecting the women and children as slaves, and putting
all the men to the sword; without these people, though they make
constant inroads into Gojam, appearing anywhere in force to stop the
desolation of their country. The whole tract between Narea and the Nile
was now cleared of enemies, and a number of priests at that time sent
to revive drooping Christianity in those parts.

In the year 1617, a league was again made among the Boren Galla, that
part of them should invade Gojam, while the others (namely the Marawa)
should enter Begemder. Upon hearing this, the king in haste marched
to Begemder, that he might be ready in case of need to assist Tigré.
He then fixed his head-quarters at Shima, but from this he speedily
removed; and, passing Emfras, came to Dobit, a favourite residence of
the emperor Jacob, where he held a council to determine which of the
two provinces he should first assist.

It was the general opinion of his officers, that to march at that
time of the year into Tigré by Begemder, was to destroy the army,
and distress both provinces; that an army, well provided with horse,
was necessary for acting with success against the Galla, and that,
in effect, though the royal army at present was so appointed, yet
there was no grass at that time of the year in all that march for the
subsistence of the cavalry, and very little water for the use of man
or beast, an inconvenience the Galla themselves must experience if
they attempted an invasion that way. It was, moreover, urged, that,
if the king should march through Woggora and Lamalmon, they might get
more food for their beasts, and water too; but then they would throw
themselves far from the place where the Galla had entered, and would be
obliged to fall into the former road, with the inconveniencies already
stated. The consequence of this deliberation was, that it was with
very great regret the good of the common-weal obliged them to leave
Tigré to the protection of Providence alone for a time, and hasten to
meet the enemy that were then laying Gojam waste.

With this view the king left Dobit, and came to the river Gomara in
Foggora. He then passed the Nile near Dara, and came to Selalo, where
he heard that the Djawi had passed the Nile from Bizamo, and entered
Gojam at the opposite side to where he then was. He there left his
baggage, and, by a forced march, advancing three days journey in one,
he came to Bed, upon the river Sadi; but, instead of finding the enemy
there, he received intelligence from Sela Christos, that he had met
the Galla immediately after their passing the Nile; had fought them,
and cut their army to pieces, without allowing them time to ravage the
country.

Upon this good news the king turned off on the road to Tchegal and
Wainadassa, and ordered Bela Christos to assemble as great an army as
he could, and fall upon the Djawi and Galla in Walaka and Shoa, as also
Ras Sela Christos, to pass the Nile and join him there.

That general lost no time, but marched straight to Amca Ohha, or
the river Amca, where he found the Edjow, who fled upon his coming,
without giving him any opportunity of bringing them to an engagement,
abandoning their wives, children, and substance, to the mercy of the
enemy. Sela Christos, having finished this expedition as he intended,
returned to join the king, whom he found encamped upon the river Suqua,
near Debra Werk, guarding those provinces in the absence of Sela
Christos. From this the king, retreating towards Dembea, passed the
Nile near Dara, and encamped at Zinzenam, whence he marched round the
lake into Dembea to his palace at Gorgora.

This village, whose name signifies _rain upon rain_, affords us a proof
of what I have said in speaking of the cause of the overflowing of the
Nile, in contradiction to the Adulitic inscription, that no snow falls
in Abyssinia, or rather, that though snow may have fallen in the course
of centuries, it is a phænomenon so rare as not to have a name or word
to express it in the whole language, and is entirely unknown to the
people in general, at least to the west of the Tacazzé.

The Abyssinian historian, from whom these memoirs are composed, says,
“That this village, called Zinzenam, has its name from an extraordinary
circumstance that once happened in these parts, for a shower of rain
fell, which was not properly of the nature of rain, as it did not run
upon the ground, but remained very light, having scarce the weight of
feathers, of a beautiful white colour like flour; it fell in showers,
and occasioned a darkness in the air more than rain, and liker to mist.
It covered the face of the whole country for several days, retaining
its whiteness the whole time, then went away like dew, without leaving
any smell or unwholesome effect behind it.”

This was certainly the accidental phænomenon of a day; for,
notwithstanding the height of the mountains Taranta and Lamalmon, snow
never was seen there, at least for ages past; and Lasta, in whose
mountains armies have perished by cold, as far as a very particular
inquiry could go, never yet had snow upon them; and Zinzenam is not in
these mountains, or in any elevated situation. On the contrary, it is
adjoining to the plain country of Foggora, near where it borders upon
Begemder, not above 20 miles from the second cataract, or 40 miles from
Gondar; so that this must have been a short and accidental change of
the atmosphere, of which there are examples of many different kinds, in
the histories of all countries.

As soon as the weather permitted, the king left his palace at Gorgora
in the way to Tocussa, where he staid several days; removed thence to
Tenkel, where he continued also four days, and proceeded to Gunkè,
where he halted. From his head-quarters at Gunkè, the king, meditating
an expedition against Atbara, sent a messenger to Nile Wed Ageeb,
prince of the Arabs, desiring a meeting with him before he attacked
the Funge, for so they call the subjects of the new monarchy, lately
established at Sennaar by the conquest of the Arabs, under Wed Ageeb, a
very considerable part of whose territory they had taken by force, and
now enjoyed as their own possessions.

Abdelcader, son of Ounsa, was the ninth prince of the race of Funge
then reigning; a weak, and ill-inclined man, but with whom Socinios
had hitherto lived in friendship, and, in a late treaty, had sent him
as a present, a nagareet, or kettle-drum, richly ornamented with gold,
with a gold chain to hang it by. Abdelcader, on his part, returned to
Socinios a trained falcon, of an excellent kind, very much esteemed
among the Arabs.

Soon after this, Abdelcader was deposed by his brother Adelan, son of
Ounsa, and fled to Tchelga, under protection of the king of Abyssinia,
who allowed him an honourable maintenance; a custom always observed in
such cases in the East, by princes towards their unfortunate neighbours.

Baady, son of Abdelcader, an active and violent young prince, although
he deposed his uncle Adelan, took this protection of his father in
bad part. It was likewise suggested to him, that the present sent
by Socinios, a nagareet, or kettle-drum, imported, that Socinios
considered him as his vassal, the drum being the sign of investiture
sent by the king to any one of his subjects whom he appoints to
govern a province, and that the return of the falcon was likely to
be considered as the acknowledgement of a vassal to his superior.
Baady, upon his accession to the throne, was resolved to rectify this
too great respect shewn on the part of his father, by an affront he
resolved to offer. With this view, he sent to Socinios two old, blind,
and lame horses.

Socinios took this amiss, as it was intended he should, and the slight
was immediately followed by the troops of Atbara, under Nile Wed Ageeb,
sent by Baady to make an inroad into Abyssinia, to lay waste the
country, and drive off the people, with orders to sell them as slaves.

Among the most active in this expedition, were those of the town of
Serké. When Baady complained that his father and rival was protected
in his own town of Tchelga, it had been answered, That true it was,
Tchelga had been ceded and did belong to Sennaar, for every purpose of
revenue, but that the sovereignty of the place had never been alienated
or surrendered to the king of Sennaar, but remained now, as ever,
vested in the king of Abyssinia. Serkè stood precisely in the same
situation with respect to Abyssinia, as Tchelga did to Sennaar, when
Socinios demanded satisfaction for the violence committed against him
by his own town of Serkè. The same answer was given him, That for all
fiscal purposes Serkè was his, but owed him no allegiance; for, being
part of the kingdom of Sennaar, it was bound to assist its sovereign in
all wars against his enemies.

Socinios, deeply engaged in the troubles that attended the beginning of
his reign, passed over for a time both the affront and injury, but sent
into Atbara to Nile Wed Ageeb, proposing a treaty with him independent
of the king of Sennaar.

There were, at this time, three sorts of people that inhabited the
whole country from lat. 13° (the mountains of Abyssinia) to the tropic
of Cancer (the frontiers of Egypt.) The first was the Funge, or
negroes, established in Atbara since the year 1504, by conquest. The
second, the old inhabitants of that country, known in very early ages
by the name of _Shepherds_, which continues with them to this day;
and these lived under a female government. The third, the Arabs, who
came hither after the conquest of Egypt, in an army under Caled Ibn el
Waalid, or Saif Ullah, _the Sword of God_, during the Khalifat of Omar,
destined to subdue Nubia, and, still later, in the time of Salidan and
his brother.

These Arabs had associated with the first inhabitants, the Shepherds,
from a similarity of life and manners, and, by treaty, the Funge had
established a tribute to be paid them from both; after which, these
were to enjoy their former habitations without further molestation.

This prince of the Arabs, Nile Wed Ageeb, embraced the offer of the
king of Abyssinia very readily; and a treaty was accordingly made
between Socinios and him, and a territory in Abyssinia granted him on
the frontiers, to which he could retire in safety, as often as his
affairs were embroiled with the state of Sennaar.

It happened soon after this, that Alico, a Mahometan, governor of the
Mazaga for Socinios, that is, of Nara and Ras el Feel, a low country,
as the name imports, of black earth, revolted from his master, and fled
to Sennaar, carrying with him a number of the king’s horses. Socinios
made his complaint to the king of Sennaar, who took no notice of it,
neither returned any answer, which exasperated Socinios so much that it
produced the present expedition, and was a cause of much bloodshed, and
of a war which, at least in intention, lasts to this day between the
two kingdoms.

Wed Ageeb, upon Socinios’s first summons, came to Gunkè, his
head-quarters, attended by a number of troops, and some of the best
horse in Atbara. Upon his entering the king’s tent, he prostrated
himself, (as is the Abyssinian custom) acknowledged himself the king’s
vassal, and brought presents with him to a very considerable value.
Socinios received him with great marks of distinction and kindness. He
decorated him with a chain and bracelets of gold, and gave him a dagger
of exquisite workmanship, mounted with the same metal; clothed him in
silk and damask after the Abyssinian fashion, and confirmed the ancient
treaty with him. The fruit of all this was presently seen; the king and
his new ally fell suddenly upon Serké, put all the male inhabitants to
the sword, sold the women and children as slaves, and burned the town
to the ground. The same they did to every inhabited place on that side
of the frontier, west to Fazuclo. After which, the king, having sent
a sarcastic compliment to Baady, returned to Dancaz, taking Wed Ageeb
with him.

Socinios had only ravaged the frontier of the kingdom of Sennaar to
the westward, from Serkè towards Fazuclo. This was but a part of the
large scheme of vengeance he had resolved to execute progressively from
Serkè, in reparation of the affront he had received from the king of
the Funge. But he delegated what remained to the two princes his sons,
and to the governor of Tigré.

Welled Hawaryat, at the head of the Koccob horse, and another body of
cavalry reckoned equal in valour, called _Maia_, and the greatest part
of the king’s household troops, were ordered to fall upon that part of
the frontier of Sennaar which the king had left from Serké eastward.
Melca Christos, with the horse of Siré and Samen, was appointed to
attack the frontier still farther east, opposite to the province of
Siré. Tecla Georgis, governor of Tigré, was directed to lay waste that
part of the kingdom of Sennaar bordering upon the frontiers of his
province.

The whole of this expedition succeeded to a wish; only Melea Christos,
in passing through the country of Shangalla, was met by a large army of
that people, who, thinking the expedition intended against them, had
attacked him in his passage, with some appearance of advantage; but by
his own exertions, and those of his troops alarmed at their prince’s
danger, he not only extricated himself from the bad situation he was
in, but gave the Shangalla so entire an overthrow, that one of their
tribes was nearly exterminated by that day’s slaughter, and crowds of
women and children sent slaves to the king at Dancaz.

The delay that this occasioned had no bad effect upon the expedition.
The victorious troops poured immediately into Atbara under Melca
Christos, and completed the destruction made by Welled Hawaryat, and
the governor of Tigré. All Sennaar was filled with people flying from
the conquerors, and an immense number of cattle was driven away by the
three armies. Baady seems to have been an idle spectator of this havock
made in his kingdom; and the armies returned without loss to Dancaz,
loaded with plunder.

Still the vengeance of Socinios was not satisfied. The Baharnagash,
Guebra Mariam, was commanded to march against Fatima queen of the
Shepherds, called at that time Negusta Errum, queen of the Greeks. This
was a princess who governed the remnant of that ancient race of people,
once the sovereigns of the whole country, who, for several dynasties,
were masters of Egypt, and who still, among their ancient customs,
preserved that known one, of always placing a woman upon the throne.
Her residence was at Mendera[54], on the N. E. of Atbara, one of the
largest and most populous towns in it; a town, indeed, built like the
rest, of clay, straw, and reeds, but not less populous or flourishing
on that account. It was in the way of the caravans from Suakem, both
to Abyssinia and Sennaar, as also of those large caravans to and from
Sudan, the Negro country upon the Niger, which then came, and still use
that road in their way to Mecca. Its female sovereign was considered
as guardian of that communication, and the caravans passing it.

The Baharnagash had in orders from Socinios to pursue this queen till
he had taken her prisoner, and to bring her in that condition into his
presence. The enterprise was by no means an easy one. Great part of
the road was without water; but Guebra Mariam, the Baharnagash, was an
active and prudent officer, and perfectly acquainted with the several
parts of the country. With a small, but veteran army, he marched down
the Mareb, between that river and the mountains, destroying all the
places through which he passed, putting the inhabitants unmercifully
to the sword, that no one might approach him, nor any report be made
of his numbers, which were everywhere magnified by those that escaped,
and who computed them from the greatness of the desolation they had
occasioned.

On the 13th day he came before Mendera, and sent a summons to the queen
Fatima to surrender. Being told that she had fled on his approach,
he answered, That he cared not where she was; but that, unless she
surrendered herself prisoner before he entered Mendera, he would first
set the town on fire, and then quench the flames by the blood of its
inhabitants.

Fatima, though old and infirm, was too great a lover of her people
to risk the fulfilling this threat from any consideration of what
might happen to her. She surrendered herself to Guebra Mariam, with
two attendants; and he, without loss of time, marched back to his own
country, abstaining from every sort of violence or excess in his way,
from respect to his female prisoner, whom he brought in triumph before
Socinios to Dancaz, and was the first messenger of his own victory.

Socinios received this queen of the Greeks on his throne; but, in
consideration of her infirmities, dispensed with the ceremony of
prostration, constantly observed in Abyssinia on being introduced to
the presence of the king: seeing that she was unable to stand during
the time of her interrogation, he ordered a low stool to be set for
her on the ground; a piece of consideration very rarely shewn to any
stranger in Abyssinia, however great their dignity and quality.

Socinios sternly demanded of his prisoner, “Why she and her
predecessors, being vassals to the crown of Abyssinia, had not only
omitted the payment of their tribute, but had not even sent the
customary presents to him upon his accession to the throne?”

To this the queen answered with great frankness and candour, “That it
was true, such tributes and presents were due, and were also punctually
paid from old times by her ancestors to his, as long as protection
was afforded them and their people, and this was the principal cause
of paying that tribute; but the Abyssinians having first suffered the
country to be in great part conquered by the Arabs, and then again by
the Funge, without ever interfering, she had concluded a peace with the
Funge of Sennaar, and paid the tribute to them, in consequence of which
they defended her from the Arabs: That she had had no soldiers but such
as were employed in keeping a strict watch over the road through the
desert to Suakem, which was anciently trusted to her; that the other
part of her subjects was occupied in keeping and rearing great herds of
cattle for the markets of Sennaar and other towns, as well as camels
for the caravans of Mecca, Cairo, and Sudan, both employments being
of public benefit; and, therefore, as she did harm to none, she had a
greater reason to wonder what could be his motive of sending so far
from home to seek her, and her harmless subjects, in the desert, with
such effusion of innocent blood.”

The king hearing this sagacious answer, which was followed by many
others of the kind, was extremely pleased; but assured her, “That he
intended to maintain his ancient right both over her subjects, and the
Arabs under Wed Ageeb, who was now his vassal, in all the country from
Fazuclo to Suakem; that he considered the Funge as usurpers, and would
certainly treat them as such.” After this Socinios dismissed the queen,
and gave her assurances of protection, having first cloathed her as
his vassal in silk and damask, after the fashion of women in her own
country.

But it was not long before this train of success met with a
considerable check. Very soon afterwards, the king being in Gojam,
a message was brought to him from the principal people of Narea,
informing him plainly, “That Benero, having become cruel and
avaricious, put many people to death wantonly, and many more for
the sake of their money; having taken from them their wives and
daughters, either for his own pleasure, or to sell them as slaves to
the Galla--they had at last murdered him, and chosen a man in his room
distinguished for his virtue and goodness.”

The king was very much exasperated at this message. He told them,
however bad Benero might have been, he considered his murder as an
insult done to himself, and had, therefore, dispatched Mustapha Basha
with some troops, and given command to all the Mahometans in Narea to
assist him, and to inquire into the death of Benero, and the merit of
his successor.

At the same time, the Galla made an inroad into Begemder; and Welled
Hawaryat, assembling what troops he could, in haste, to stop the
desolation of that province, and having come in sight of the enemy,
he was forsaken by his army, and slain, together with the Cantiba of
Dembea, Amdo, and Nile Wed Ageeb prince of the Arabs, after fighting
manfully for the king. Socinios, upon the arrival of this news, gave
himself up to immoderate sorrow; not so much for the loss of his army
which had misbehaved, as for the death of Welled Hawaryat his favourite
son, and Amdo and Nile, the two best officers in his army.

It will now be necessary that we look back a little to the state of
religious affairs in Abyssinia, which began from this time to have
influence in every measure, and greatly to promote the troubles of
that empire; though they were by no means their only cause, as some
have said, with a view to throw greater odium upon the Jesuits, who
surely have enough to answer for, without inflaming the account by any
exaggeration.

Paez, in the course of building the palace at Gorgora, had deservedly
astonished the whole kingdom by a display of his universal genius and
capacity. If he was assiduous and diligent in raising this fabric, he
had not neglected the advancing of another, the conversion of Abyssinia
to the obedience of the see of Rome.

Ras Sela Christos (if we believe these missionaries) had converted
himself, by reading with attention the Abyssinian books only. Being
about to depart from Gojam to fight against the Galla, he wanted very
much to have made his renunciation and confession in the presence of
Peter Paez. But, as he was busied at Gorgora building a convent and
palace there, he contented himself with another Jesuit, Francisco
Antonio d’Angelis; and, being victorious in his expedition, he gave
the fathers ground and a sum of money to build a monastery at Collela,
which was now the third in Abyssinia belonging to the Jesuits.

As for the king, though probably already determined in his own mind, he
had not taken any step so decisive as could induce the compliance of
others. Disputes were constantly maintained, for the most part in his
presence, between the missionaries and the Abyssinian monks, chiefly
concerning the long-agitated question, the two natures in Christ, in
which, although the victory declared always in favour of the Jesuits,
if we may credit their representations, no conviction followed on the
part of the adversaries. At last Abuna Simon complained to the king,
that unusual and irregular things had been permitted without his
knowledge; that disputes upon articles of faith had been held without
calling him, or his being permitted to give his clergy the advantage of
his support in these controversies.

The king, who did not believe that the Abuna’s eloquence or learning
would make any great alteration, ordered the disputations to be held
a-new in the Abuna’s presence. That priest’s ignorance made the matter
worse; and the king, holding this point as now settled, made his first
public declaration, that there were two natures in Christ, perfect God
and perfect man, really distinct between themselves, but united in one
divine person, which is the Christ.

At this time, letters came by way of India, both from the king of
Spain, Philip II. dated in Madrid the 15th of March 1609, and from the
pope Paul V. of the 4th of January 1611. These letters contain nothing
but general declamatory exhortations to Socinios to persevere in the
Christian faith, assuring him of the assistance of the Holy Spirit,
instead of those Portuguese regiments which he had solicited. However,
the affair of the conversion being altogether settled between the
king and Paez, it was thought proper to make the renunciation first,
and then depend upon the king of Spain and the pope for sending the
soldiers, if their prayers were not effectual.

It was necessary that Socinios should write to the pope, notifying
his submission to the see of Rome. But letters on such a subject were
thought of too great consequence to be sent, as former dispatches to
Europe had been, without being accompanied by proper persons, who,
upon occasion, might assume the character of ambassadors, and give any
assurance or explanation needful.

It was at the same time considered, that the way by Masuah was so
liable to accidents, the intermediate province of Tigré being still as
it were in a state of rebellion, that it would be easy for the enemies
of the Catholic faith to intercept these messengers and letters by
the way, so that their contents might be published amongst the king’s
enemies in Abyssinia, without ever being made known in Europe. Some
proposed the longer, but, as they apprehended, the more secure way, by
passing Narea and the provinces south of the frontiers of that kingdom,
partly inhabited by Gentiles, partly by Mahometans, to Melinda, on the
Indian Ocean, where they might embark for Goa.

Lots were cast among the missionaries who of their number should
undertake this long and dangerous journey. The lot fell upon Antonio
Fernandes, a man of great prudence, much esteemed by the king, and by
the general voice allowed to be the properest of all the society for
this undertaking. He, on his part, named Fecur Egzie (_beloved of the
Lord_) as his companion, to be ambassador to the king of Spain and the
pope. This man had been one of the first of the Abyssinians converted
to the Catholic faith by the Jesuits, and he continued in it steadily
to his death. He was a person of tried courage and prudence, and of a
pleasant and agreeable conversation.

It was the beginning of March 1613 Antonio Fernandes[55] set out for
Gojam, where was Ras Sela Christos. Fecur Egzie had set out before,
that he might adjust his family affairs, and took with him ten
Portuguese, six of whom were to go no farther than Narea, and return,
the other four to embark with him for India.

The governor detained the small company till he procured guides from
among the Shats and Gallas, barbarous nations near Narea, and eastward
of it, from whom he took hostages for properly protecting this caravan
in their way, paying them well, as an encouragement for behaving
honestly and faithfully.

On the 15th of April they had set out from Umbarma, then the
head-quarters of Sela Christos, who gave them for guards forty
men armed with shields and javelins. Nor was it long before their
difficulties began. Travelling about two days to the west, they came
to Senaffé, the principal village or habitation of the Pagan Gongas,
very recently in rebellion, and nearly destroyed, rather than subdued.
To the first demand of safe conduct, they answered in a manner which
shewed that, far from defending the travellers from others, they were
resolved themselves to fall upon them, and rob or murder them in
the way. One Portuguese offered himself to return with Fernandes to
complain of these savages to Sela Christos; who, upon their arrival,
dispatched three officers with troops to chastise these Pagans, and
convey the ambassador and his attendants out of their territory and
reach.

The Gongas, being informed that a complaint was sent to Sela Christos,
which would infallibly be followed by a detachment of troops, gave
the ambassador the safeguard he demanded, which carried him in three
days to Minè[56]. This is the name of some miserable villages, often
rebuilt, and as often destroyed, upon a ford of the Nile, over which is
the ordinary passage for the Mahometan merchants into Bizamo, the way
to the mountainous country of Narea and Caffa. As the rains had begun
to fall here with violence, when Fernandes and his companions arrived,
they were obliged to pass the river on skins blown full of wind.

The distance from Minè to Narea is 50 leagues due south, with little
inclination to west. The road to it, and the places through which you
pass, are very distinctly set down in my map, and, I believe, without
any material error; it is the only place where the reader can find this
route, which, till now, has never been published.

The next day our travellers entered the kingdom of Bizamo, inhabited
by Pagan Galla. These people came in crowds with arms in their hands,
insisting upon being paid for liberty of passing through their country;
but, seeing the company of the ambassador take to their arms likewise,
they compounded for a few bricks of salt and coarse cotton cloaths, and
thereupon suffered them to pass. The same day, the guide, sent from
Narea to conduct them by crooked and unfrequented paths out of the way
of the Pagan Galla, made them to enter into a large thicket through
which they could scarcely force themselves; after which they came to
a river called _Maleg_, when it was nearly night. Next day they could
find no ford where they could pass. They now entertained a suspicion,
that the guard from Narea had betrayed them, and intended to leave them
in these woods to meet their death from the Galla.

The day after, they found the ford, and passed it without difficulty;
and, being on the other side, they began to be a little more composed,
as being far from the Pagans, and now near entering the territory of
Narea. After ascending a high mountain, they came to Gonea, where they
found a garrison under one of the principal officers of that kingdom,
who received them with great marks of honour and joy, on account of the
warm recommendation Sela Christos had given them, and perhaps as much
for a considerable present they had brought along with them.

Narea, the southmost province of the Abyssinian empire, is still
governed by its native princes, who are called _the Beneros_; its
territory reached formerly to Bizamo.

The Galla have quite surrounded them, especially on the south-east and
north. What is to the west is a part of Africa, the most unknown. The
people of Narea have a small trade with Melinda on the Indian Ocean,
and with Angola on the western, by means of intermediate nations. Narea
is abundantly supplied with gold from the Negro country that is nearest
them. Some have, indeed, said there is gold in Narea; but, after a
very diligent investigation, I find it comes chiefly from towards the
Atlantic.

The kingdom of Narea stands like a fortified place in the middle of a
plain. Many rivers, rising in the fourth and fifth degrees of latitude,
spread themselves, for want of level, over this flat country, and
stagnate in very extensive marshes from south by east, to the point of
north, or north-west.

The foot of the mountains, or edge of these marshes nearest Narea,
is thick overgrown with coffee-trees, which, if not the _only_, is
the _largest_ tree known there. Then comes the mountainous country of
Narea Proper, which is interspersed with small, unwholesome, but very
fertile valleys. Immediately adjoining is the more mountainous country
of Caffa, without any level ground whatever. It is said to be governed
by a separate prince: they were converted to Christianity in the time
of Melec Segued, some time after the conversion of Narea. The Galla,
having settled themselves in all the flat ground to the very edge of
the marshes, have, in great measure, cut off the communication with
Abyssinia for many years together; so that their continuance in the
Christian faith seems very precarious and uncertain, for want of books
and priests to instruct them.

The Nareans of the high country are the lightest in colour of any
people in Abyssinia; but those that live by the borders of the marshes
below are perfect blacks, and have the features and wool of negroes:
whereas all those in the high country of Narea, and still more so in
the stupendous mountains of Caffa, are not so dark as Neopolitans or
Sicilians. Indeed it is said that snow has been seen to lie on the
mountains of Caffa, as also in that high ridge called Dyre and Tegla;
but this I do not believe. Hail has probably been seen to lie there;
but I doubt much whether this can be said of a substance of so loose a
texture as snow.

There is great abundance both of cattle, grain, and all sorts of
provisions in Narea, as well in the high as in the low country. Gold,
which they sell by weight, is the medium of commerce within the country
itself; but coarse cotton cloths, stibium, beads, and incense, are the
articles with which their foreign trade to Angola, and the kingdoms on
the Atlantic, is carried on.

The Nareans are exceedingly brave. Though they have been conquered, and
driven out of the low country, it has been by multitudes--nation after
nation pouring in upon them with a number of horse to which they are
perfect strangers: But now, confined to the mountains, and surrounded
by their marshes and woods, they despise all further attempts of the
Galla, and drive them from their frontiers whenever they approach too
near.

In these skirmishes, or in small robbing parties, those Nareans are
taken, whom the Mahometan merchants sell at Gondar. At Constantinople,
India, or Cairo, the women are more esteemed as slaves than those
of any other part of the world, and the men are reckoned faithful,
active, and intelligent. Both sexes are remarkable for a chearful,
kind disposition, and, if properly treated, soon attach themselves
inviolably to their masters. The language of Narea and Caffa is
peculiar to that country, and is not a dialect of any neighbouring
nation.

Antonio Fernandes in this journey, seeking to go to India by Melinda in
company with Fecur Egzie ambassador, passed through this country; but
none of the Jesuits ever went to Narea with a view of converting the
people, at which I have been often surprised. There was enough of gold
and ignorance to have allured them. That softness and simplicity of
manners for which the Nareans are remarkable, their affection for their
masters and superiors, and firm attachment to them, would have been
great advantages in the hands of the fathers. Every Abyssinian would
have encouraged them at the beginning of this mission; and, if once
they had firmly established themselves in a country of so difficult
access, they might have bid defiance to prince Facilidas, and the
persecution that destroyed the progress of the Catholic faith in that
reign.

From Gonea, in six days they came to the residence of Benero, the
sovereign of the country; since the conquest and conversion under Melec
Segued, he is called Shum. The ambassador and Fernandes were received
by the Benero with an air of constraint and coolness, though with
civility. They found afterwards the cause of this was the insinuation
of a schismatic Abyssinian monk, then at the court of that prince, who
had told him that the errand of the ambassador and missionary to India
was to bring Portuguese troops that way into Abyssinia, which would end
in the destruction of Narea, if it did not begin with it.

Terrified at a danger so near, the Benero called a council, in which
it was resolved that the ambassador should be turned from the direct
road into the kingdom of Bali, to a much more inconvenient, longer, and
dangerous one; and, the ambassador hesitating a little when this was
proposed, the Benero told him plainly, that he would not suffer him to
pass further by any other way than that of Bali.

Bali was once a province belonging to Abyssinia, and was the first
taken from them by the Galla. It is to the north-east of Narea, to the
west of the kingdom of Adel, which separates it from the sea; of which
ample mention has been already made in the beginning of this history.

This was to turn them to Cape Gardefan, the longest journey they could
possibly make by land, and in the middle of their enemies; whereas
the direction of the coast of the Indian Ocean running greatly to the
westward, and towards Melinda, was the shortest journey they could make
by land. Melinda, too, had many rich merchants, who, though Moors, did
yet traffic in the Portuguese settlements on the coast of Malabar, and
had little intelligence or concern with the religious disputes which
raged in Abyssinia.

However, I very much doubt whether this nearest route could be
accomplished, at least by travellers, such as Fecur Egzie, Fernandes,
and their companions, all ignorant of the language, and, therefore,
constantly at the discretion of interpreters, and the malice or private
views of different people through whose hands they must have passed.

The Benero, having thus provided against the dangers with which his
state was threatened, if our travellers went by Melinda, made them
a present of fifty crusades of gold for the necessaries of their
journey; and, as their way lay through the small state of Gingiro, and
an ambassador from the sovereign of that state was then at Narea, he
dispatched that minister in great haste, recommending the Portuguese to
his protection so long as they should be in his territory.

Fecur Egzie and his company set out with the ambassador of Gingiro in a
direction due east; and the first day they arrived at a post of Narea,
where was the officer who was to give them a guard to the frontiers;
and who, after some delay, in order to see what he could extort from
them, at last gave them a party of eighty soldiers to conduct them to
the frontiers.

After four long days journey through countries totally laid waste by
the Galla, keeping scouts constantly before them to give advice of
the first appearance of any enemy, that they might hide themselves in
thickets and bushes; at mid-day they began to descend a very steep
craggy ridge of mountains, when the ambassador of Gingiro, now their
conductor, warned them, that, before they got to the foot of the
mountain, they should enter into a very thick wood to hide themselves
till night, that they might not be discovered by the Galla shepherds
feeding their flocks in the plain below; for only at night, when they
had retired, could those plains be passed in safety.

At four o’clock in the afternoon they began to enter the wood, and were
lucky in getting a violent shower of rain, which dislodged the Galla
sooner than ordinary, and sent them, and their cattle home to their
huts. But it was, at the same time, very disagreeable to our travellers
on account of its excessive coldness. Next day, in the evening,
descending another very rugged chain of mountains, they came to the
banks of the large river Zebeé, as the Portuguese call it; but its true
name is Kibbeé, a name given it by the Mahometan merchants, (the only
travellers in this country) from its whiteness, approaching to the
colour of melted butter, which that word signifies.

The river Zebeé, or Kibbeé, surrounds a great part of the kingdom of
Gingiro. It has been mistaken for the river El Aice, which runs into
Egypt in a course parallel to the Nile, but to the west of it.

Narea seems to be the highest land in the peninsula of Africa, so that
here the rivers begin to run alternately towards the Cape of Good Hope
and Mediterranean; but the descent at first is very small on either
side. In the adjoining latitudes, that is 4° on each side of the Line,
it rains perpetually, so that these rivers, though not rapid, are yet
kept continually full.

This of Zebeé, is universally allowed by the merchants of this country
to be the head of the river Quilimancy, which, passing through such
a tract of land from Narea to near Melinda, must have opened a very
considerable communication with the inland country.

This territory, called Zindero, or Gingiro, is a very small one. The
father and Fecur Egzie rested the sixth day from their setting out
from Narea. The river Zebeé, by the description of Fernandes, seems to
incline from its source in a greater angle than any river on the north
of that partition. He says it carries more water with it than the Nile,
and is infinitely more rapid, so that it would be absolutely impassable
in the season of rains, were it not for large rocks which abound in its
channel.

The passage was truly tremendous; trees were laid from the shore to the
next immediate rock; from that rock to the next another tree was laid;
then another that reached to the shore. These trees were so elastic as
to bend with the weight of a single person. At a great distance below
ran the foaming current of the river, so deep an abyss that it turned
the heads of those who were passing on the moveable elastic support or
bridge above.

Yet upon this seeming inconvenience the existence of that country
depended. The Galla that surrounded it would have over-run it in a
month, but for this river, always rapid and always full, whose ordinary
communication by a bridge could be destroyed in a moment; and which,
though it had one ford, yet this was useless, unless passengers had
assistance from both sides of the river, and consequently could never
be of service to an enemy.

The terrible appearance of this tottering bridge for a time stopped
the ambassador and missionary. They looked upon the passing upon these
trembling beams as certainly incurring inevitable destruction. But the
reflection of dangers that pressed them behind overcame these fears,
and they preferred the resolution to run the risk of being drowned in
the river Zebeé, rather than, by staying on the other side all night,
to stand the chance of being murdered by the Galla. But, after all the
men only could pass the bridge, they were obliged to leave the mules
on the other side till the next morning, with instructions to their
people, that, upon the first appearance of the Galla, they should leave
them, and make their best way over the bridge, throwing down one of the
trees after them. The next morning, two peasants, subjects of Gingiro,
shewed them the ford, where their beasts passed over with great
difficulty and danger, but without loss.

It was necessary now to acquaint the king of Gingiro of their arrival
in his kingdom, and to beg to be honoured with an audience. But he
happened at that time to be employed in the more important business of
conjuration and witchcraft, without which this sovereign does nothing.

This kingdom of Gingiro may be fixed upon as the first on this side
of Africa where we meet with the strange practice of divining from
the apparition of spirits, and from a direct communication with the
devil: A superstition this which likewise reaches down all along the
western side of this continent on the Atlantic Ocean, in the countries
of Congo, Angola, and Benin. In spite of the firmest foundation in
true philosophy, a traveller, who decides from the information and
investigation of facts, will find it very difficult to treat these
appearances as absolute fiction, or as owing to a superiority of
cunning of one man in over-reaching another. For my own part, I confess
I am equally at a loss to assign reasons for disbelieving the fiction
on which their pretensions to some preternatural information are
founded, as to account for them by the operation of ordinary causes.
The king of Gingiro found eight days necessary before he could admit
the ambassador and Fernandes into his presence. On the ninth, they
received a permission to go to court, and they arrived there the same
day.

When they came into the presence of the king he was seated in a large
gallery, open before, like what we call a balcony, which had steps from
below on the outside, by which he ascended and descended at pleasure.
When the letter which the ambassador carried was intimated to him, he
came down from the gallery to receive it, a piece of respect which he
shewed to the king of Abyssinia, though he was neither his subject nor
vassal. He inquired much after the king’s health, and stood a little by
the ambassador and Fernandes, speaking by an interpreter. Afterwards
he again returned to his balcony, sat down there, read his letter, and
then corresponded with the ambassador by messages sent from above to
them below.

It is impossible to conceive from this, or any thing that Fernandes
says, whether the language of Gingiro is peculiar to that country or
not. The king of Gingiro read Socinios’s letter, which was either in
the Tigré or Arabic language. Fernandes understood the Arabic, and
Fecur Egzie the Tigré and Amharic. It is not possible, then, to know
what was the language of the king of Gingiro, who read and understood
Socinios’s letter, but spoke to Fecur Egzie by an interpreter.

At last the king of Gingiro told them, that all contained in the king
of Abyssinia’s letter was, that he should use them well, give them good
guard and protection while they were in his country, and further them
on their journey; which he said he would execute with the greatest
pleasure and punctuality.

The next day, as is usual, the ambassador and missionary carried the
king’s present, chints, calicoe, and other manufactures of India,
things that the king esteemed most. In return to Fernandes he sent a
young girl, whom the father returned, it not being customary, as he
said, for a Christian priest to have girls in his company. In exchange
for the girl, the good-natured king of Gingiro sent him a slave of the
other sex, and a beautiful mule. With all respect to the scruples of
the father, I think it would have been fair to have kept the beautiful
mule, and given the young female Gingerite to his companion in the
journey, Fecur Egzie, who could have had no scruples.

Fernandes says he received the boy from the only view of saving his
soul by baptism. I wonder, since Providence had thrown the girl first
in his way, by what rule of charity it was he consigned her soul to
perdition by returning her, as he was not certain at the time that he
might not have got a mule or camel in exchange for the girl; and then,
upon his own principles, he certainly was author of the perdition of
that soul which Providence seemed to have conducted by an extraordinary
way to the enjoyment of all the advantages of Christianity; surely the
care of Neophytes of the female sex was not a new charge to the Jesuits
in Abyssinia.

It seems to be ridiculous for Fernandes to imagine that the sovereign
of this little state called himself Gingiro, knowing that this word
signified a monkey. His enemies might give him that name; but it is
not likely he would adopt it himself. And the reason of that name is
still more ridiculous; for he says it is because the gallery is like
a monkey’s cage. If that was the case, all the princes in Congo and
Angola give their audiences in such places. Indeed, it seems to me that
it is here the customs, used in these last-mentioned parts of Africa,
begin, although Gingiro is nearer the coast of the Indian Ocean than
that of the Atlantic. The colour of the people at Gingiro is nearly
black, still it is not the black of a negro; the features are small
and straight as in Europe or Abyssinia.

All matters in this state are conduced by magic; and we may see to
what point the human understanding is debased in the distance of a
few leagues. Let no man say that ignorance is the cause, or heat
of climate, which is the unintelligible observation generally made
on these occasions. For why should heat of climate addict a people
to magic more than cold? or, why should ignorance enlarge a man’s
powers, so that, overleaping the bounds of common intelligence, it
should extend his faculty of conversing with a new set of beings in
another world? The Ethiopians, who nearly surround Abyssinia, are
blacker than those of Gingiro, their country hotter, and are, like
them, an indigenous people that have been, from the beginning, in the
same part where they now inhabit. Yet the former neither adore the
devil, nor pretend to have a communication with him: they have no
human sacrifices, nor are there any traces of such enormities having
prevailed among them. A communication with the sea has been always
open, and the slave-trade prevalent from the earliest times; while the
king of Gingiro, shut up in the heart of the continent, sacrifices
those slaves to the devil which he has no opportunity to sell to man.
For at Gingiro begins that accursed custom of making the shedding
of human blood a necessary part in all solemnities. How far to the
southward this reaches I do not know; but I look upon this to be the
geographical bounds of the reign of the devil on the north side of the
equator in the peninsula of Africa.

This kingdom is hereditary in one family, but does not descend in
course to the eldest son, the election of the particular prince being
in the nobles; and thus far, indeed, it seems to resemble that of their
neighbours in Abyssinia.

When the king of Gingiro dies, the body of the deceased is wrapped in
a fine cloth, and a cow is killed. They then put the body so wrapped
up into the cow’s skin. As soon as this is over, all the princes
of the royal family fly and hide themselves in the bushes; while
others, intrusted with the election, enter into the thickets, beating
everywhere about as if looking for game. At last a bird of prey, called
in their country Liber, appears, and hovers over the person destined to
be king, crying and making a great noise without quitting his station.
By this means the person destined to be elected is found, surrounded,
as is reported, by tigers, lions, panthers, and suchlike wild beasts.
This is imagined to be done by magic, or the devil, else there are
everywhere enough of these beasts lying in the cover to furnish
materials for such a tale, without having recourse to the power of
magic to assemble them.

As they find their king, then, like a wild beast, so his behaviour
continues the same after he is found. He flies upon them with great
rage, resisting to the last, wounding and killing all he can reach
without any consideration, till, overcome by force, he is dragged to
a throne, which he fills in a manner perfectly corresponding to the
rationality of the ceremonies of his instalment.

Although there are many that have a right to seek after this king, yet,
when he is discovered, it does not follow, that the same person who
finds him should carry him to his coronation; for there is a family
who have a right to dispute this honour with the first possessor; and,
therefore, in his way from the wood, they set upon the people in whose
hands he is, and a battle ensues, where several are killed or wounded;
and if these last, by force, can take him out of the hands of the first
finder, they enjoy all the honours due to him that made him king.

Before he enters his palace two men are to be slain; one at the foot
of the tree by which his house is chiefly supported; the other at
the threshold of his door, which is besmeared with the blood of the
victim. And, it is said, (I have heard this often in Abyssinia from
people coming from that country) that the particular family, whose
priviledge it is to be slaughtered, so far from avoiding it, glory in
the occasion, and offer themselves willingly to meet it.--To return to
our travellers--

The father and the ambassador, leaving the kingdom of Gingiro,
proceeded in a direction due east, and entered the kingdom of Cambat,
depending still on the empire of Abyssinia, and there halted at
Sangara, which seems to be the principal place of the province,
governed at that time by a Moor called _Amelmal_.

On the left of Cambat are the Guragués, who live in some beggarly
villages, but mostly in caves and holes in the mountains. The father
was detained two days at Sangara, at the persuasion of the inhabitants
there, who told him there was a fair in the neighbourhood, and people
would pass in numbers to accompany him, so that there would be no
danger. But, after staying that time at Sangara, he found that the
intention of this delay was only to give time to some horsemen of the
Guragués to assemble, in order to attack the caravan on the road, which
they did soon after; and, though they were repulsed, yet it was with
loss of one of the company, a young man related to Socinios, who, being
wounded with a poisoned arrow, died some days after.

In the mean time, an Abyssinian, called _Manquer_, overtook their
caravan. As he was a schismatic, his intention was very well known
to be that of disappointing their journey; and he prevailed with
Amelmal so far as to make him suspect that the recommendations which
the ambassador brought were false. He, therefore, insisted on the
ambassador’s staying there till he should get news from court. Amelmal,
Manquer, and the ambassador, each dispatched a messenger, who tarried
three months on the road, and at last brought orders from the king to
dispatch them immediately.

As Amelmal now saw the bad inclination of Manquer, he detained him
at Cambat that he might occasion no more difficulties in their way.
He gave the ambassador likewise seven horses, which were said to be
the best presents to the princes or governors that were in his road,
and dispatched the travellers with another companion, Baharo, who had
brought the letters from the king.

From Cambat they entered the small territory of Alaba, independent of
the king of Abyssinia, whose governor was called _Aliko_, a Moor. This
man, already prejudiced against the missionary and the ambassador,
was still hesitating whether to allow them to proceed, when Manquer,
who fled from Amelmal, arrived. Aliko, hearing from this incendiary,
that the father’s errand was to bring Portuguese that way from India
to destroy the Mahometan faith, as in former times, burst into such
violent rage as to threaten the father, and all with him, with death,
which nothing but the reality of the king’s letters, of which he had
got assurance from Baharo, and some regard to the law of nations,
on account of the ambassador Fecur Egzie, could have prevented. In
the mean time, he put them all in close prison, where several of the
Portuguese died. At last, after a council held, in which Manquer gave
his voice for putting them to death, a man of superior character in
that country advised the sending them back to Amelmal, the way that
they came; and this measure was accordingly adopted.

They returned, therefore, from Cambat, and thence to Gorgora, without
any sort of advantage to themselves or to us, only what arises
from that opportunity of rectifying the geography of the country
through which they passed; and even for this they have furnished but
very scanty materials, in comparison of what we might reasonably
have expected, without having occasioned any additional fatigue to
themselves.

We have already said, that though Socinios had not openly declared his
resolution of embracing the Catholic faith, yet he had gone so far as
to declare, upon the dispute held between the Catholic and schismatic
clergy, in his own presence and that of the Abuna, that the Abyssinian
disputants were vanquished, and ought to have been convinced from the
authority of their own books, especially that of Haimanout Abou, the
faith of the ancient fathers and doctors of their church received
by them from the beginning as the undoubted rule of faith: That the
doctrine of the Catholic church being only what was taught in the
Haimanout Abou concerning the two natures in Christ, this point was to
all intents and purposes settled; and, therefore, he signified it as
his will, that, for the future, no one should deny that there are two
natures in Christ, distinct in themselves, but divinely united in one
person, which was Christ; declaring at the same time, that in case any
person should hereafter deny, or call this in doubt, he would chastise
him for seven years.

The Abuna, on the contrary, supported by the half-brother of the king,
Emana Christos, (brother to Ras Sela Christos) published a sentence
of excommunication, by affixing it to the door of one of the churches
belonging to the palace, in which he declared all persons accursed who
should maintain two natures in Christ, or embrace or vindicate any of
the errors of the church of Rome.

The king had received various complaints of the Agows, who had abused
his officers, and refused payment of tribute. He had set out upon an
expedition against them, intending to winter in that country; but,
hearing of the rash conduct of the Abuna, and the leagues that were in
consequence everywhere forming against him, he returned to Gorgora,
and sent to the Abuna, that unless, without delay, he recalled the
excommunication he had published, he should be forthwith punished with
loss of his head. This language was too clear and explicit to admit a
doubt of its meaning; and the Abuna, giving way for the time, recalled
his excommunication.

A conspiracy was next formed by Emana Christos, the eunuch Kefla Wahad
master of the household to the king, and Julius governor of Tigré,
to murder Socinios in his palace; for which purpose they desired an
audience upon weighty affairs, which being granted by the king, the
three conspirators were admitted into his presence.

It was concerted that Julius should present a petition of such a nature
as probably to produce a refusal; and, in the time of the altercation
that would ensue, when the king might be off his guard, the other two
were to stab him.

Just before the conversation began, he was advised of his danger
by a page, and Julius presenting his petition, the king granted it
immediately, before Emana Christos could come up to assist in the
dispute which they expected; and this conspirator appearing in the
instant, the king, who had got up to walk, invited them all three up
to the terrace. This was the most favourable opportunity they could
have wished. They, therefore, deferred assaulting him till they should
have got up to the terrace: The king entered the door of the private
stair, and drew it hastily after him. It had a spring-lock made by
Peter Paez, which was fixed in the inside, and could not be opened from
without, so that the king was left secure upon the terrace. Upon this
the conspirators, fearing themselves discovered, retired, and from that
time resolved to keep out of the king’s power.

At that period, Socinios had determined upon an expedition against the
Funge, that is, against the blacks of Sennaar, who had entered his
country in a violent manner, destroying his people, and carrying them
off as slaves. It was, therefore, concerted, that while the king was
busied far off with the Funge, Emana Christos, Julius, and the eunuch
Kefla, at once should attack Sela Christos, at whom, next to the king,
the conspirators chiefly aimed; and the cause was, that the king had
taken the posts of Ras and the government of Gojam from Emana Christos,
who was a schismatic, and had given them to his younger brother, Sela
Christos, a violent Catholic.

Julius began by a proclamation in Woggora, in which he commanded, that
those who believed two natures in Christ should immediately leave the
province, and that all those who were friends to the Alexandrian faith
should forthwith repair to him, and fight in defence of it. He then
ordered the goods of all the Catholics in Tigré to be confiscated, and
straightway marched to surprise Sela Christos then in Gojam. But the
king received intelligence of his designs, and returned into Dembea
before it was well known that he had left it. This, at first, very much
disconcerted Julius; and the rather, that Emana Christos and Kefla
Wahad kept aloof, nor had they declared themselves openly yet, nor did
they seem inclined to do it till Julius had first tried his fortune
with the king.

This rebel, now full of presumption, advanced with his army to where
the Nile issues out of the great lake Tzana; and there he found the
Abuna Simon, who had staid for some weeks in one of the islands upon
pretence of devotion. Simon, after having confirmed Julius in his
resolution of murdering the king, his father-in-law, or of dying in
defence of the Alexandrian faith, if necessary, persuaded him to
lay aside his design of marching against Sela Christos, but rather
immediately to return back and surprise the king before these two
joined.

Julius readily adopted this advice of the Abuna; while that priest, to
shew he was sincere, offered to accompany him in person, and share his
fortune. This was accepted with pleasure by Julius, who next morning
received the Abuna’s benediction at the head of his army, and assisted
at a solemn excommunication pronounced against the king, Sela Christos,
the fathers, and all the Catholics at court.

The king’s first thought, upon hearing these proceedings, was to send
some troops to the assistance of Sela Christos, warning him of his
danger; but, upon hearing measures were changed, and that the first
design was against himself, he marched to meet Julius, and sent a
message to Sela Christos to join him with all possible speed; and, as
he was an excellent general, he took his post so judiciously that he
could not be forced to fight against his will till succour was brought
him, without great disadvantage to the enemy.

Julius, fearing the junction of Sela Christos, endeavoured to fight
the two armies separately. For which purpose he advanced and pitched
his camp close within sight of that of Socinios, resolving to force
him to an engagement. This was thought a very dangerous measure, and
was contrary to the advice of all his friends, who saw how judiciously
Socinios had chosen his ground; and it was known to the meanest
soldier on both sides, how consummate the king was in the art of war.

But the Abuna having persuaded him, that, as soon as the soldiers
should see him, they would abandon the king and join his colours, early
in the morning he put on his coat of mail, and, mounted on a strong
and fiery horse, was proceeding to the king’s camp, when Malacotawit,
his wife, (daughter to Socinios) persuaded him at least to take some
food to enable him to bear the fatigues of the day. But disdaining such
advice, he only answered furiously, “That he had sworn not to taste
meat till he had brought her her father’s head;” and, without longer
waiting for the rest of his troops, he leaped over the enemy’s lines in
a quarter where the Abuna had promised he should be well received.

Indeed, on his first appearance, no one there opposed his passage, but
seemed rather inclined to favour him as the Abuna had promised: And he
had now advanced near to a body of Tigré soldiers that were the guard
of the king’s tent, loudly crying, “Where is your emperor?” when one
of these with a stone struck him so rudely upon the forehead that it
felled him to the ground; and, being now known, another soldier (called
Amda) thrust him through with a sword, and thereafter killed him with
many wounds. His head was cut off and carried to Socinios.

The few that attended him perished likewise among the soldiers. Nor did
any of Julius’s army think of a battle, but all sought their safety
by a flight. The king’s troops being all fresh, pursued the scattered
rebels with great vigour, and many were slain, without any loss on the
part of the royalists.

The Abuna Simon had, for a considerable time, stood as an ecclesiastic,
unhurt and unheeded, among the flying troops. Being at last
distinguished by his violent vociferation, and repeated imprecations
upon the king and the conquerors, he was slain by a common soldier, who
cut his head off and carried it to Socinios, who ordered it, with the
body, to be taken from the field of battle and buried in a church-yard.

Socinios gave the spoil of the camp to his soldiers. It was said,
that no time, since the Turks were defeated under Mahomet Gragnè,
was there ever so much treasure found in a camp. The pride of Julius
induced him to carry all his riches with him. They were the fruits
of avarice and oppression in all the principal posts of the empire,
and which in their turn he had enjoyed. They were likewise the spoils
of the Catholics, newly acquired by the confiscations made since his
rebellion. A great number of cattle was likewise taken, which the king
distributed among the priests of the several churches, the judges, and
other lay-officers. Very great rejoicings were made everywhere, in the
midst of which arrived Ras Sela Christos with his army from Gojam, and
was struck with astonishment on seeing the small number of troops with
which the king had been exposed to fight Julius, and how complete a
victory he had gained with them.

In the mean time, Emana Christos had retired to a high mountain in
Gojam, called _Melca Amba_, where he continued to excite the people
of that province to rebel and join Julius, whose arrival he daily
expected, that, together, they might fight Sela Christos. But the
rashness of Julius, and the march of Sela Christos to the king’s
assistance, had very much disconcerted their whole scheme.

Af Christos, who commanded in Gojam after the departure of Ras Sela
Christos, sent to Melca Amba, “reproaching Emana Christos with
seditious practices; upbraiding him with the unnatural part he acted,
being a brother-german to Sela Christos, and brother to Socinios by
the same mother, while Julius was married to his daughter, and had
constantly enjoyed the great places of the empire. He asked him, What
they could be more? Kings they could not be, neither he nor Julius.
Ras, the next place in the empire, they both had enjoyed; and, if the
king had taken that office lately from Emana Christos, he had not given
it to a stranger, but to his brother Sela Christos, who, it was but
fair, should have his turn; and that the importance of his family was
not the less increased by it. Lastly, he represented the danger he ran,
if Julius made his peace, of falling a sacrifice as the adviser of the
rebellion.”

Emana Christos answered, “That though he rebelled with Julius, and at
the same time, yet it was not as a follower of Julius, nor against
the king; but that he took up arms in defence of the ancient faith
of his country, which was now, without reason, trodden under foot in
favour of a religion, which was a false one if they understood it, and
an useless one if they did not. He said he was satisfied of his own
danger; but neither his connection with the king, nor his being related
to Sela Christos, could weigh with him against his duty to God and
his country. The king and his brother might be right in embracing the
Romish religion, because they were convinced of the truth of it: he had
used, however, the same means, and the same application, had heard the
arguments of the same fathers, which, unluckily for him, had convinced
him their religion was not a true, but a false one. For the same
reasons he continued to be an Alexandrian, which his brother alledged
had made him a Roman. He, therefore, begged Af Christos to consider,
by a review of things since David III.‘s time, how much blood the
change would cost to the kingdom by the attempt, whether it succeeded
or not; and whether, after that consideration, it was worth trying the
experiment.”

This artful and sensible message, sent by a man of the capacity and
experience of Emana Christos, easily convinced Af Christos that it was
not by argument Emana Christos was to be brought to his duty; but, like
a good officer, he kept up correspondence with him, that he might be
master of the intelligence to what place he retired.

Soon after Sela Christos had left Gojam to join the king, by forced
marches he surrounded Melca Amba, where Emana Christos was, and had
assembled a number of troops to descend into the plain and create a
diversion in favour of Julius. The mountain had neither water in it nor
food for such a number of men, nor had Emana Christos forces enough to
risk a battle with an officer of the known experience of Af Christos,
who had chosen the ground at his full leisure, and with complete
knowledge of it.

Three days the army within the mountain held out without complaining;
but, in the evening of the third day, some monks and hermits
(_holy men_, the abettors of this rebellion) came to Af Christos
to remonstrate, that there were several convents and villages in
the mountain, also small springs, and barley enough to answer the
necessities of the ordinary inhabitants, but were not enough for such
an additional number which had taken forcible possession of the wells,
and drank up all the water, to the immediate danger of the whole
inhabitants perishing with thirst.

To this Af Christos answered, That the reducing the mountain, and the
taking Emana Christos, was what was given him in commission by the
king, to attain which end he would carefully improve all the means in
his power. He was sorry, indeed, for the distress of the convents in
the mountain, but could not help it; nor would he suffer one of them to
remove or come down into the plain, nor would he discontinue blockading
the mountain while Emana Christos was there and alive. No other
alternative, therefore, remained but the delivering up Emana Christos.
His army would have fought for him against a common enemy, but against
thirst their shields and swords were useless.

Af Christos, with his prisoner, forthwith proceeded to join the king,
and passed the Nile into Begemder. At crossing the river Bashilo, they
were informed of the defeat and death of Julius and the Abuna. The
messenger had also letters for Emana Christos, whom the king did not
know to be yet prisoner: among these was one from Sela Christos, in
which he upbraided his brother with his unnatural treason, and assured
him speedily of a fate like that of Julius. Emana Christos received
this intelligence almost dead with fear, for never was a prophecy made
which seemed to have needed less time to accomplish than this of his
brother’s.

Af Christos surrendered his prisoner to the king at Dancaz, who
immediately assembled a full convocation of judges of all degrees;
and the prisoner being ordered to answer to his charge concerning the
rebellion of Julius and his conspiracy against the king’s life, he took
the part he had been advised, and palliated the whole of his actions,
without positively denying any one of them, and submitted to the
king’s mercy. The judges, considering the defence, unanimously found
him guilty of death; but the king, whose last vote, when sitting in
judgment, supersedes and overturns all the rest, reprieved, and sent
him prisoner to Amhara.

Hitherto the king had contented himself with fixing two points in
favour of the Roman church, in contradiction to that of Alexandria.
The first denounced punishment to every one who did not believe that
there are two natures in Christ, and that he is perfect God and perfect
man, without confusion of persons. The second was rather a point of
discipline than of faith; yet it was urged as such, by declaring it to
be unlawful to observe Saturday, the ancient Jewish sabbath. The first
of these, if it was not the cause, had been assumed as the pretext for
the rebellion of Julius. The second produced that of Jonael governor of
Begemder, of which we are now to speak. But thus far only the king had
gone. He had not openly joined the church of Rome, nor as yet renounced
that of Alexandria, nor forced any one else to do so.

The first prelude to Jonael’s rebellion was an anonymous letter
written to the king, in which all the stale and lame arguments of
the Alexandrians were raked together, and stated with a degree of
presumption worthy of the ignorance and obstinacy of those from
whom they came. This, though ridiculous, and below notice in point
of argument, offended greatly both the king and the Jesuits, by the
asperity of its terms, and the personal applications contained in it.
The king was treated as another Dioclesian, thirsting after Christian
blood, and for this devoted to hell; as were also the Jesuits, whom
they called relations of Pilate, in allusion to their origin from Rome.

The king, grievously offended, added this injunction to the former
proclamation, “That all out-door work, such as plowing and sowing,
should be publicly followed by the husbandman on the Saturday, under
penalty of paying a web of cotton cloth, for the first omission, which
cloth was to be of five shillings value; and the second offence, was
to be punished by a confiscation of moveables, and the crime not to be
pardoned for seven years;”--the greatest punishment for misdemeanors in
Abyssinia. To this Socinios added, _vivâ-voce_, from his throne, that
he never _abolished_, but _explained_ and established their religion,
which always taught, as their own books could testify, that Christ
was perfect God and perfect man, two distinct natures united in one
hypostasis of the eternal word; neither was it in compliance with the
Jesuits that he abrogated the observation of the Jewish sabbath, but
in obedience to the council of Chalcedon, which was founded in the
holy scriptures, for which he was ready at all times to lose his life,
though he should endeavour first to inflict that punishment on such as
were its enemies.

In order to shew that he did not mean to trifle, he ordered the tongue
of a monk (called Abba Af Christos) to be cut out, for denying the
two natures in Christ; and Buco, one of the principal generals of his
court (who afterwards died a zealous Catholic) he ordered to be beaten
with rods, and degraded from his employment, for observing the Jewish
sabbath.

The king, having given these public, unequivocal testimonies of his
resolution, put himself at the head of his army, and marched against
Jonael; but that rebel, not daring to meet his offended sovereign,
retired into the mountains; whereupon the king laid waste the country
of the Galla, who had protected him. This occasioned a division among
the Galla themselves. One party declaring for the king, apprehended
Jonael with intention to deliver him up; but he was soon rescued out of
their hands by the contrary party, enemies to Socinios. His protectors
being once known, the manner of working his destruction was soon
known likewise. The king’s presents made their way to that faithless
people, the only barbarians with whom the right of hospitality is not
established. Upon receiving the king’s bribe, they murdered Jonael, cut
his head off, and sent it to the king.

The rebellion in Damot was not so easily quelled. Sela Christos,
a zealous Catholic, was sent against the rebels to inforce the
proclamation with regard to the sabbath. But as his connections
were very considerable among them, he chose first to endeavour, by
fair means, to induce the ignorant savages to return to reason and
obedience. With this view, he sent to expostulate with them; and to
beg that, in articles of faith, they would suffer themselves to be
examined and instructed by men of learning and good life; not by those
monks, ignorant like themselves, from whom they only could learn vice,
blasphemy, and rebellion. To this the Damots answered, as one man,
That, if his friendship for them and good intentions were real, he
should give them, for proof, the immediate burning of all the Latin
books which had been translated into the Ethiopian language, and that,
then, he should hang those Jesuits who were with him upon a high tree.

We are not, however, to consider this was really from a conviction or
persuasion of the Damots, who inhabit a province bordering upon the
Agows and Gongas, and their Christianity much upon a par with that
of either of these nations. But the fact was, that the fanatics and
zealots for the Alexandrian faith had retired in great numbers to
Damot, as to a province the worst affected to the king, from the recent
violence of Julius, who, in an expedition against the Shangalla, by
order of the king had driven off the cattle of the peaceable Damots,
who had been then guilty of no offence. And as these were ready
to rebel for a quarrel merely their own, it was very easy for the
schismatical monks to add this religious grievance to the sum of the
preceding.

Sela Christos had with him about 7000 men, most of them Catholics and
veteran soldiers; and among these 40 Portuguese, partly on foot, armed
with musquets, the others on horseback, clad in coats of mail. Very
different was the army of Damots. They were superior in number for they
exceeded 12000 men, and among these were 400 monks, well armed with
swords, lances, and shields, earnestly bent upon the obtaining a crown
of martyrdom in defence of their religion, from the innovation proposed
by Socinios. At the head of these was a fanatical monk (one Batacu) who
promised them armies of angels, with flaming swords, who should slay
their enemies, but render them invulnerable, as he declared himself to
be, either by sword or lance.

The battle was fought at the foot of the mountains of Amid Amid, on the
6th of October 1620. Sela Christos, sure of victory, and unwilling to
slaughter a people he had been used to protect, began first to shew his
superiority in slight skirmishes. After which, desiring a parley, he
sent messengers to them, begging them to consider their own danger, and
offering them a general amnesty upon their submission. These messengers
were not allowed to approach, for showers of arrows that were poured
upon them; so the battle began with great animosity on both sides. The
Damots were soon broken and put to flight by the superiority of Sela
Christos’s soldiers. But the 400 monks, already mentioned, fought most
desperately in defiance of numbers, nor did they seek their safety
by a flight. One hundred and eighty of them were killed on the place
they occupied, valiantly fighting to the very last. A rare example,
and seldom found in history, that fanatics like these, always ready to
rebel, should persist and sacrifice their lives to the follies of their
own preaching.

As for their celestial auxiliaries, whose assistance they were promised
as far as could be discovered, they neither did harm nor good. We may
suppose they stood neuter. But Batacu the hermit, ringleader of this
sedition, whose body was so miraculously armed, that neither sword
nor spear could make any impression upon it, was unfortunately thrust
through with a lance in the very beginning of the engagement, which
greatly served to discredit these supernatural aids.

It was in this year 1620, that Socinios marched into Begemder against
Jonael. At which time Peter Paez was employed at Gorgora in building
the church there. The king returned immediately to Dancaz after the
defeat of Jonael, and passed his winter at that place.

It was on the 16th of January 1621, that the dedication of the church
of Gorgora was made by Peter Paez; and at that time the king was in
Begemder. Upon his return to Dancaz he met Paez at Gorgora for the
first time. He remained at Gorgora till the 3d of October of that year,
when the news of the defeat of the Damots by Sela Christos arrived,
which he received in presence of that priest at Gorgora. In this, both
the Jesuits and Abyssinian annals agree. It is not then possible that
Peter Paez could have been with the king at Sacala, or Geesh, in the
country of the Agows on the 21st of March 1621[57]; for both Peter Paez
and Socinios were at that time in Gorgora.

At this time the Ethiopic memoirs of Socinios’s reign interrupted their
continual topics of rebellion and bloodshed, to record a very trifling
anecdote; which, however, I insert, as it serves to give some idea of
the simplicity and ignorance of those times.

The historian says, that this year there was brought into Abyssinia,
a bird called _Para_, which was about the bigness of a hen, and spoke
all languages; Indian, Portuguese, and Arabic. It named the king’s
name: although its voice was that of a man, it could likewise neigh
like a horse, and mew like a cat, but did not sing like a bird. It was
produced before the assembly of judges, of the priests, and the azages
of court, and there it spoke with great gravity. The assembly, after
considering circumstances well, were unanimously of opinion, that the
evil spirit had no part in endowing it with these talents. But to be
certain of this, it was thought most prudent to take the advice of Ras
Sela Christos, then in Gojam, who might, if he thought fit, consult the
superior of Mahebar Selassé; to them it was sent, but it died on the
road. The historian closes his narrative by this wise reflection on the
parrot’s death; “Such is the lot of all flesh.”

The king, immediately after his victory over Jonael, had resolved to
throw off the mask, and openly to profess the Catholic religion. The
success of Sela Christos against the Damots had confirmed him. He had
passed the rainy season, as I have before observed, between Gorgora
and Dancaz; and, in the usual time, in the month of November, marched
to Foggora, a narrow stripe of plain country, reaching from Emfras to
Dara, bounded on one side by the lake Dembea, and on the other by the
mountains of Begemder.

For this purpose he sent to Peter Paez, his ordinary confessor, to
come to him; and, having told him his resolution, he declared, that,
in proof of the sincerity of his conversion, he had put away all his
wives (of whom he had several of the first quality, and many children
by them) and retained only his first, by whom he had the eldest of his
sons, destined to succeed him in the empire.

Paez, having received his confession, and public renunciation of the
Alexandrian faith, returned to Gorgora singing his _nunc dimittis_,
as if the great end of his mission was now completed; nor was he
deceived in his prognostication. For, having too much heated himself
with zeal in travelling, he was, upon his arrival, taken with a violent
fever; and, tho’ every sort of remedy was administered to him by
Antonio Fernandes, yet he died on the third of May 1623, with great
demonstrations of piety and resignation, and firm conviction, that he
had done his duty in an active, innocent, and well-spent life.

He had been seven years a captive in Arabia in the hands of the Moors,
and nineteen years missionary in Abyssinia, in the worst of times, and
had always extricated himself from the most perilous situations, with
honour to himself and advantage to his religion. In person, he was very
tall and strong; but lean from continual labour and abstinence. He was
red faced; which, Tellez says, proceeded from the religious _warmth_ of
his heart. He had a very good understanding, which he had cultivated,
every hour of his life, by study or practice.

Besides possessing universal knowledge in scholastic divinity, and the
books belonging to his profession, he understood Greek, Latin, and
Arabic well, was a good mathematician, an excellent mechanic, wrought
always with his own hands, and in building was at once a careful,
active labourer, and an architect of refined taste and judgment. He
was, by his own study and industry, painter, mason, carver, carpenter,
smith, farrier, quarrier, and was able to build convents and palaces,
and furnish them without calling one workman to his assistance; and in
this manner he is said to have furnished the convent at Collela, as
also the palace and convent at Gorgora.

With all these accomplishments, he was so affable, compassionate, and
humble in his nature, that he never had opportunity of conversing, even
with heretics, without leaving them his friends. He was remarkably
chearful in his temper; and the most forward always in promoting
innocent mirth, of that puerile species which we in England call _fun_,
in great request among the young men in Abyssinia, who spend much
of their time in this sort of conversation, whether in the city or
the camp. Above all, he was a patient, diligent instructor of youth;
and the greatest part of his disciples died in the persecution that
soon followed, resolutely maintaining the truths of that religion
their preceptor first had taught them. In a word, he was the hinge
upon which the Catholic religion turned. He had found the seeds of it
sown in the country for a hundred years before his time, which had
borne little fruit, and was then apparently on the decline. Nineteen
years of this most active missionary, and the death of three kings,
had advanced it only so far as to be embraced publicly by one of
them; after Paez’s death, in six years it fell, though supported most
strenuously by a king prodigal of the blood of his subjects in this
cause, by a patriarch sent from Rome, and by above 20 very zealous and
active missionaries; and, as far as my foresight can carry me, it is
so entirely fallen, that, unless by a special miracle of Providence
wrought for that purpose, it never will rise again.

The king’s renunciation of the Alexandrian faith was followed by a
very strong, or rather violent manifesto, and we need not be at a loss
to guess whom he employed to draw it up. It begins by asserting the
supremacy of the church of Rome, as the see of St Peter; it mentions
the three first general councils, which condemned Arius, Macedonius,
and Nestorius; next quotes the council of Chalcedon, as the fourth
general council, as having justly condemned Dioscurus; but says not
a word of the council of Ephesus, which the Abyssinians receive
instead of that of Chalcedon; insists largely upon the two natures in
Christ; then, leaving the patriarchs of Alexandria, it attacks not
the doctrine, but the morals of the Abunas, sent from Alexandria into
Abyssinia, accuses the ecclesiastics in general of simony and paying
money to the Abuna for their ordination, (a well-founded part of the
charge) which I fear continues to this day.

The Abuna Marcus was, it is there said, convicted by Socinios, or
Melec Segued, of a crime of such turpitude that the name of it should
never stain paper. He was degraded and banished to the island of Dek.
His successor Christodulus had many concubines. Abuna Petros, who
succeeded, took the wife of a poor Egyptian, and lived with her; he
then excommunicated his sovereign Jacob, after he had reigned seven
years, and died in battle in the actual commission of treason, fighting
against the prince.

Simon, the last Abuna, besides living in adultery with the wife of an
Egyptian called Matti, kept several young women with him as concubines;
and being detected in having a daughter by one of them, with a view to
conceal it, he caused the child to be exposed to be devoured by the
hyæna. After living in constant disobedience to God’s law, he joined
the crime of rebellion to the repeated breach of every command in the
decalogue; and appearing in battle, and excommunicating his sovereign,
God (says the manifesto) delivered him into our victorious hands, and
he was slain by a common soldier in the very commission of his crime.

It must be owned, we cannot have a worse picture of any Christian
church than that here given of the bishop’s church of Alexandria.
Charity should induce us to hope some exaggeration had crept into it.
Yet when we consider that the facts mentioned were all within the space
of forty years, and consequently must have been within the knowledge,
not only of Socinios, but of many people then alive and at court, we
cannot, with the impartiality of an historian, deny our apprehensions,
that these charges were but too-well founded.

However this may be, neither the king’s example, nor his manifesto,
had the effect he desired. A rebel, whom the annals call the son of
Gabriel, declared himself against the king in Amhara, just at the time
that Socinios, misled by the enemies of Sela Christos, had begun
to entertain suspicion of his loyalty, and had deprived him of the
government of Gojam and the Agows. Finding, after an examination, there
was no person that was qualified to bring this affair to a happy issue
but Sela Christos, he replaced him in his government of Gojam, giving
him, at the same time, orders to march against the son of Gabriel, into
Amhara.

This command of the king, Ras Sela Christos soon complied with, and,
upon his first appearance in that province, the rebel retired to a
high mountain which he made his place of arms, the top producing both
provisions and water sufficient to maintain a large garrison.

The Ras, seeing that force availed nothing, had recourse to the usual
trap these rebels fall into. Weary of confinement on the mountain,
sensible that he was by himself too weak to leave it, while such
an enemy expected him below, he accepted the friendship of the
neighbouring Galla, who offered to join him in such numbers as to
enable him to descend from the mountain, and try his fortune in a
battle. The treaty was concluded, and the junction no sooner effected,
than the faithless Galla, before gained by the Ras, fell upon the son
of Gabriel with their clubs, and killed him on the spot, having so
mangled his body that scarce a piece was reserved to send to his enemy.

The joy this victory occasioned at court met with a great addition
by the arrival of the Romish patriarch. It has been before observed,
that the king had himself wrote letters to the pope and king of
Spain, declaring his intentions to turn Catholic. Peter Paez, Antonio
Fernandes, and the other priests, had given a much more favourable
prospect of religious affairs than had as yet been conveyed to Rome;
the wiser part of the conclave, however, had doubted. But now, the king
had voluntarily made his recantation, it was no longer thought time for
delay, and accordingly Alphonso Mendez, a Jesuit doctor of divinity, a
man of great learning, by birth a Portuguese, was ordained at Lisbon
the 25th of May 1624.

From thence he proceeded to India by the way of Goa, attended by
several fresh missionaries; and finding there letters from Socinios,
and a passport from the king of Dancali, a Mahometan prince in alliance
with the Abyssinians, he arrived at Bilur, an open bay in the small and
barren state of Dancali, on the second of May 1625, and was received,
by the brother of the reigning prince, with every token of friendship
that so poor a state and sovereign could afford; the king of Dancali
himself was at the distance of six days journey, in a place where there
was greater plenty of water and provisions. The following day the king
sent four mules for the fathers to join him, and received them in a
room of a round figure, surrounded and covered with bundles of straw,
but so low they scarce could raise themselves after having made their
bows.

In this miserable kingdom, which I shall not describe, as, since that
period, it has been conquered by the Galla, the patriarch and fathers
staid almost in want of necessaries for sixteen days. At last they
set out, having, with much difficulty, mustered sufficient beasts of
burden to carry their baggage. The road lay through part of the country
wherein are the mines of fossile-salt, hot, barren, and absolutely
without water, and exposed greatly to the incursions of the Galla.
After two days journey, they arrived in the morning of the third, at
the foot of Senaffé, where there was water. It is the frontier (as the
name imports) of the province of Enderta, now united to the government
of Tigré. It is part of that ridge of mountains which separates the
seasons, occasioning summer on the one side, while rain and cold
prevail on the other.

On the night before they came to the mountain, while dubious of
their way, a star of more than ordinary magnitude, and of surprising
brightness, appeared over the patriarch, giving so strong a light
that it illuminated the heavens down to the horizon. It was not,
in its place or manner of appearing, like a common star, but stood
stationary, in the way leading to Senaffé, for above six minutes, and
disappeared[58]. This star, the patriarch and his followers modestly
say, was probably the same that conducted the Magi to the cradle of
Christ, and was now sent to shew them the way into Abyssinia.

While they were at the foot of this mountain, the Muleteers, all
Mahometans, thought the occasion a proper one to plunder them, by
obliging them to pay an additional hire for their beasts, which they
pretended were not able to ascend so steep a mountain. The camels
certainly could not pass; but mules and asses have a more practicable
road, for the sake of carrying the salt. They insisted to leave the
company till they should bring them fresh mules. The caravan consisted
of the patriarch and six ecclesiastics, priests, and friars, and
thirteen laymen, three of whom were musicians. It was very probably
their intention to have sent to them people who would very soon have
put a fatal period to the mission, had not Emanuel Baradas, with
a number of Abyssinians, and officers, and plenty of all things
necessary, joined the patriarch on the 16th of June 1625; while their
late conductors, conscious of misbehaviour, fled without seeking their
hire.

In five days they came to Fremona, where they staid till November; and,
in December, arrived at Gorgora, where they were introduced to the
king in his palace. Socinios ordered the patriarch to be placed on a
seat equal in height to his own, on his right hand; and at that very
audience, which was on the 11th of February 1626, it was settled that
the king should take an oath of submission to the see of Rome.

This useless, vain, ridiculous ceremony, was accordingly celebrated
on the 11th of February, with all the pageantry of a heathen festival
or triumph. The palace was adorned with all the pomp and vanity that
the church of Rome, and especially that part of it, the Order of
the Jesuits, had solemnly abjured. The patriarch, as a mark of his
superiority over the Abunas, preached a sermon in the Portuguese
language upon the primacy of the chair of St Peter, full of Latin
quotations, which is said to have had a wonderful effect upon the king
and Sela Christos, neither of whom understood one word either of Latin
or Portuguese.

That part of the patriarch’s discourse, which was applicable to
Socinios’s conversion, was answered by Melca Christos, governor
of Samen, (himself a schismatic) in the language of Amhara, which
neither the patriarch nor his retinue understood, and concluded with
these words, “That as the king thought himself obliged to fulfil
those promises of submitting himself to the see of Rome which his
predecessors had made, the time was now come in which he should do
that, if such was his pleasure. These last words of the orator seem not
to have satisfied the zeal of Socinios. He interrupted Melca Christos
by saying, that it was not now, but a long time since, that he had
submitted to the church of Rome, as true successor of St Peter; and
the present occasion was only a confirmation of what he had formerly
professed.”

The patriarch answered by a few words, prudently and sensibly, I
suppose to save time, seeing that, short or long, his discourse would
not be understood. But proceeding to facts, he opened a new testament,
while Socinios, upon his knees, took the following oath: “We, sultan
Segued, emperor of Ethiopia, do believe and confess that St Peter,
prince of the apostles, was constituted, by Christ our Lord, head of
the whole Christian church, and that he gave him the principality and
dominion over the whole world, by saying to him, _You are Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my church; and I will give you the keys of
the kingdom of heaven_. And again when he said, _Keep my sheep_. Also
we believe and confess, that the pope of Rome, lawfully elected, is the
true successor of St Peter the apostle, in government; that he holdeth
the same power, dignity, and primacy, in the whole Christian church:
and to the holy father Urban VIII. of that name, by the mercy of God,
pope, and our lord, and to his successor in the government of the
church, we do promise, offer, and swear true obedience, and subject,
with humility at his feet, our person and empire: so help us God and
these holy gospels before us.”--After this, each man swore personal
obedience, officers, priests, and monks, according to their several
orders or conditions.

The prince royal Facilidas, purely and simply in the form prescribed,
took this oath, without any addition or alteration. But Ras Sela
Christos, heated with zeal, after repeating the formula, drawing his
sword in violent passion, uttered these words, “What has passed let it
be past; but, from this day forward, he that falls from his duty this
shall be his judge[59].”

This hasty speech, not well understood, was thought by some to reflect
on those he had discovered to be in the confederacy with the rebel son
of Gabriel. As the court was full of parties and discontent, every one
applied the threat to himself, and all joined in a league to undo Sela
Christos, who had so wantonly declared himself the leader and champion
of persecution.

To this oath of obedience to the pope, he likewise added one to the
king, and to the prince his successor, Facilidas, with a strange
clause, or qualification, which made what he said formerly still
worse:--“I likewise swear to the prince, as heir of his father in this
empire, as long as he shall hold favour, and defend the holy Catholic
faith; and if he shall fail in this, I hereby swear to be his greatest
enemy.” This extravagant addition he insisted should be imposed
upon all the officers of state, and of the army then at court, and
therefore did most deservedly seal his own condemnation and punishment,
which overtook him in the end, though it did not follow till long
afterwards.

To these violent proceedings were added others still more violent. A
solemn excommunication was pronounced against all such as did not keep
that oath, and a proclamation was forthwith made, “That all people, in
the line of being ordained priests, should first embrace the Catholic
religion upon pain of death; that all should observe the form of the
church of Rome in the celebration of Easter and Lent, under the same
penalty; and with that the ceremonies of the day ended.”

    _Tempus erit cum magno optaverit emptum,_
    _Intactum Pallanta._

It was a day ever to be marked with black, not only in the annals of
Ethiopia, but in those of Rome.

Although the arrival of the patriarch at Bilur had been happily
effected, both as to himself and those that attended him, it was not
so with some of his brethren sent to assist him in that mission. Two
Jesuits, Francisco Machado and Bernard Pereira, had received the king’s
letters in India for their safe conduct to Bilur in Dancali. Whether by
malice, or inadvertency, the king’s secretary, instead of Bilur, had
mentioned Zeyla in the letter.

Zeyla, an island belonging to the king of Adel, was of all other
places that where the people were most inveterate against the Catholic
religion. No sooner did the Shekh know the quality and errand of these
missionaries, than he confined them to close prison, where, after
great suffering, they were both put to death; and, to aggravate this,
a letter was written to Socinios stigmatizing him with the name of
apostate from the religion of his forefathers, and applying to him many
opprobrious names.

This letter, at another time, would not have failed to have been
followed by the chastisement it deserved. But Adel, formerly a
flourishing and commercial kingdom, was now fallen, and reduced to
a multitude of banditti. Trade had left it. A garrison of nominal
janizaries, since the reign of Sultan Selim, had kept the little island
of Zeyla for the pretended purpose of a customhouse; but, in fact, it
was a post of robbers, who only maintained themselves there for the
sake of plundering merchants who came by sea; while the Galla poured in
numbers upon the prince from the continent, and of the ancient kingdom
of Adel, had left him nothing but Aussa the capital, a town situated
upon a rock, on the banks of the river Hawash, Azab, and Raheeta, and
a few other miserable villages upon the sea; and even part of these
were daily falling into the hands of that enemy, destined very soon to
over-run them all. This abject state to which they had been reduced, we
may suppose, was the only reason that protected them from the vengeance
of a high-spirited prince, such as Socinios certainly was.

This violent conduct of Socinios in his abjuration was followed by that
of the patriarch Alphonso Mendes, perfectly in the same spirit. The
clergy were re-ordained, their churches consecrated anew, grown men
as well as children again baptised, the moveable feasts and festivals
reduced to the forms and times of the church of Rome; circumcision,
polygamy, and divorce were abrogated for ever; and the many questions
that thereupon arose, and which were understood to belong to the civil
judge, the patriarch called to his own tribunal exclusively.

All the tenets of the church of Alexandria, whether of faith or
discipline, were rejected; and it was not known how far the patriarch
intended to subject the civil jurisdiction of the judges to the
ecclesiastical power. Two steps that he took, the one immediately after
the other, seemed to give great reason of fear upon this head.

In order to understand the first of these cases, it will be necessary
to know, that it is a fundamental constitution of the monarchy of
Ethiopia, that all lands belong to the king; and that there is no such
thing as church-lands in this country. Those that the king has given
for the maintenance of churches or monasteries are resumed every day,
at the instance of, and for the convenience of individuals, and new
ones granted in their stead sometimes of a greater value, sometimes of
a less. Nor have the priests or monks any property in these lands. A
lay-officer, appointed by the king, divides to each monk or priest, his
quota of the revenue, applying any overplus to other uses, which is, we
may suppose, often putting it into his own pocket.

There was a nobleman of great distinction for his family and rank at
court, for his age, and the merit of his service; he had occupied some
of the lands belonging to a monk who happened to be a Catholic. This
man, had he been an Alexandrian, could have had no recourse to the
Abuna his patriarch, and the cause must have been tried before the
civil judge. But Mendes was of another opinion. He ordered the nobleman
to make his defence before the ecclesiastical tribunal; and, upon his
refusing this as a novelty to which he was not bound, he condemned him
immediately to restore the lands to the monk. This, too, was refused on
the part of the present possessor, who being one day attending the king
at church, the patriarch, without preamble, pronounced against him a
formal sentence of excommunication, by which he gave him over, soul and
body, to the devil.

Such procedure was, till then, unknown in Abyssinia. The nobleman,
though otherwise brave, was so much affected with the terms of his
sentence as to faint, imagining himself already in the clutches of
Satan, and it was with difficulty he was recovered, the king making
intercession with the patriarch to take off this censure, or rather
this curse.

Sudden as it was, however, in the inflicting, and easy in the removal,
it made very lasting and serious impressions on the minds of men of all
ranks, greatly to the disadvantage of the patriarch and the professors
of his new religion, in the exercise of which they did not discover
that degree of charity, meekness, mercy, and long-suffering, that they
had been taught were the very essentials of it.

The next instance was this: There had been an Itchegué, that is, the
superior of the monks of Debra Libanos, an Order instituted by Abba
Tecla Haimanout, the last Abyssinian Abuna, not more celebrated by the
church than the state, as being the restorer of the line of Solomon,
for many years banished to Shoa; and this superior, besides the dignity
of his office, was remarkable for an innocent, pious, and holy life.
It happened that a Catholic monk officiated in a church where this
Itchegué had been buried under the altar; the patriarch declared the
church defiled by the burial of that heretic and schismatic, and
suspended the celebration of divine service till the body was raised
and thrown out of the church in a most indecent manner. Universal
discontent seized the minds of all men; and, from that time, it seemed
the friends of the old religion began again to recover strength, and
the Catholics to be looked upon, if not with hatred, yet with terror.
And every trifle now contributed towards the one or the other.

The Jesuits, following practices or customs of their own, had thought
fit to exhibit a kind of religious plays or farces. The devil in these
pieces is always the buffoon; he plays harlequin and slight-of-hand
tricks, fires squibs and gun-powder, very little consistent with the
decency of the other persons who compose the drama. This continued
to be practised in several Catholic countries in Europe, while that
learned company existed[60]. It happened to be necessary to introduce
figures of this kind blacked all over, and in masks, with cloven feet,
&c. The first exhibition of these figures so surprised and terrified
the Abyssinian audience, that they fled immediately upon their
appearance, crying out, Alas! alas! these Franks have brought devils
into our country with them!

This great extension of civil jurisdiction, and the large strides it
took to annihilate the civil power, the encroachments it made upon the
prerogative of the king, till now supreme in all causes ecclesiastical
and civil, the more than regal, the more, if possible, than papal
pride of the patriarch, began to be felt universally, and it was seen
to be intended to lessen every order of government, from the king to
the lowest officer in the province. From this time, therefore, we date
the decline of the Catholic interest in Abyssinia. The first blow was
given it by the king himself, not with a view to destroy it, for he
was a sincere Catholic upon principle, but to controul and keep it
within some bounds, as he found there was no order could otherwise be
maintained.

He desired the patriarch to permit the use of the ancient liturgies of
Ethiopia, altered by himself in every thing where they did not agree
with that of the church of Rome. With this the patriarch was obliged to
comply, because there was in it an appearance of reason that men should
pray to God in a language that they understood, and which was their
own, rather than a foreign tongue of which they did not understand
one word. This was thought so obvious in Ethiopia as not to admit
any doubt. But the order and practice of the church of Rome was just
the contrary; and this wound was a mortal one; for no sooner was the
permission given to use their own liturgies, than all the Abyssinians
embraced them to a man, and went on in their old prayers and services
without any of the patriarch’s alterations.

To these events, not important in themselves, but only from the effect
they had upon the minds of mankind, succeeded tragedies of a more
serious nature. I have already observed, in speaking of the Galla,
that they were divided into three principal divisions, those on the
east of Abyssinia were called Bertuma Galla, those on the south called
Toluma, and those on the west Boren Galla; each of these were divided
into seven, and these again subdivided into a number of tribes. Each
of these seven nations choose a king once in seven years called Lubo;
and it is usually the first act of the new king’s reign to over-run the
neighbouring provinces of Abyssinia, laying every thing waste with fire
and sword for this year, even if they had no provocation, but had been
at peace for several years before.

The Abyssinians remained long in ignorance of this cause of these
invasions, and, while that was the case, they could take no measures to
be prepared against, and resist them. But after, when the customs of
the Galla were better known, their periodical invasions were watched
and provided against, so that though they were still continued, they
were generally repelled with the slaughter and defeat of the invaders.

It happened that the present year, 1627, was the season of electing
the king, and of the invasion. Though the time of the expedition
was known, no intelligence had been given of the manner in which it
was to be executed. In past times, the nations, or tribes of Galla,
assaulted each the opposite province in whose frontiers they were
settled; but this year it was agreed among them to choose one province,
Gojam, which, by uniting their whole force, they were to devote to
destruction, or, if possible, keep possession of it.

Buco was governor of Gojam; the king had sent Sela Christos to his
assistance, and was intending to follow with another army himself. In
the mean time, the passes through which the Galla used to enter were
all lined with men, and every preparation made to receive them.

These barbarians advanced to the Nile in multitudes never seen before;
and, finding the province perfectly on its guard, they feigned a panic,
or disagreement among themselves, retired in seeming confusion, and
dispersed, some, as it was said, to their own homes, and some to an
expedition against Narea. This in reality had often happened; but now
it was only a stratagem; for they all assembled in their own country
Bizamo, of which the Abyssinians had no intelligence. Buco, thinking he
was free of them for that year, disbanded his troops, or detached them
to other services; Sela Christos did the same; neither did Socinios
advance with his army.

In that interval of weakness, news were sent to Buco that the Galla had
passed the Nile. Upon which he advanced with 1000 foot and 200 horse,
believing that it was some small part of that army which he thought
had some time before been dispersed. After hearing mass with great
devotion, and receiving the sacrament, in passing through a thick wood
he was assaulted by the Galla. Being a man, brave in his own person,
and exceedingly well-trained to arms, he fought so successfully, and
so encouraged his men by his example, that he cut that body of Galla
entirely to pieces; and, as he thought the whole matter then at an
end, he ordered his drums to beat, and his trumpets to sound, in token
of victory.

The rest of the Galla, who were now dispersed through the province,
but at no great distance, burning and destroying, as their custom is,
and who left this body behind them only to secure their retreat across
the river, returned all to their colours, upon hearing the drums and
trumpets of Kasmati Buco, whom they did not know to be so near; and, as
soon as he came in sight, despising his small number, they surrounded
them on every side. Buco immediately saw that he was a lost man; but,
considering the multitude of the enemy, and the unprepared state of the
province, he thought his own life and those of his followers could not
be better employed than by obstinately fighting to disable the enemy,
so as to put it out of their power to pursue the ruin of the country
further; throwing himself furiously into the thickest of the Galla, he,
at first onset, killed four of the most forward of their leaders, and
made himself a lane through the troops opposing him; and he was now got
without their circle, when some of his officers seeing him, cried to
him to make the best of his way, as affairs were desperate, and not to
add by his death to the misfortunes of that day.

Upon this he paused, as recollecting himself for a moment; but,
disdaining to survive the loss of his army, he threw himself again
among the Galla, where his men were still fighting, carrying victory
wherever he went. His horse was at last wounded, and, being otherwise
young and untrained, became ungovernable. It was necessary to quit him,
when, drawing his sword, and leaping upon the ground, he continued the
fight with the same degree of courage, till the Galla, who did not dare
to approach him near, killed him by a number of javelins thrown at a
distance.

The news of the defeat and death of Buco reached Sela Christos, then in
march to join him; nor did the misfortune that had already happened,
nor the bad prospect of his own situation, alter his resolution of
attacking the enemy: But he first wrote to the king his brother,
telling him his situation, and the probable consequences of doing his
duty as he had determined, laying all the blame upon the malice of
his enemies, who, to gratify their own private malice, had left him
without assistance, and occasioned misfortunes so detrimental to the
common-weal.

Sela Christos passed this night upon a rising ground, and in the
morning early descended into the plain, with a view of attacking the
Galla, when, to his great surprise, that barbarous people, content with
the slaughter of Kasmati Buco and his army, and not willing to risk a
large quantity of plunder with which their whole army was loaded, had
repassed the Nile, and returned home.

Tecla Georgis was son-in-law to Socinios, and then governor of Tigré,
but at variance with his father-in-law upon some quarrel with his wife.
Determined on this account to rebel, he associated with some noblemen
of the first rank and power in Tigré, particularly Guebra Mariam and
John Akayo, declaring to them, that he would no longer suffer the Roman
religion, but defend the ancient church of Alexandria to the utmost
of his power. And, to convince all the Abyssinians of his sincerity,
he tore off the figures of crucifixes, and all church-ornaments and
images of saints that were in relief, and burned them publicly, to make
his reconciliation with the king impossible. He then called before
him Abba Jacob his Catholic chaplain, and, having stripped him of his
pontificals, killed him with his own hand. There was no method he could
devise of bringing his quarrel sooner to an issue than this which he
had adopted. But he did not seem to have taken equal pains to provide
for his defence, as he had done to give provocation.

Socinios, upon the first intelligence of this murder and treason,
ordered Keba Christos to march against him with the troops that he had
at hand. This general, equally a good soldier, subject, and Catholic,
being convinced of the necessity of punishing speedily so monstrous
a crime, passed by forced marches through Siré to Axum, thence to
Fremona; and, having appointed Gaspar Paez to meet him there, he
confessed himself, and received the sacrament from that Jesuit’s hands.
From Fremona he continued with the same speed, making three ordinary
days marches in one, being desirous of preventing the possibility of
Tecla Georgis’s collecting troops, and taking refuge on a mountain
called _Masba_, which he heard to be his design.

It was the 12th of December 1628 that news were brought him of the
situation of the enemy; upon which he ordered his baggage to be left
behind, and every soldier to carry two loaves, and to march without
resting till he came up with Tecla Georgis.

In the morning of the day following, two horsemen, on the scout before
him, discovered five of the rebel soldiers upon the look-out likewise.
These, upon seeing Keba Christos’s horsemen, returned immediately to
their master, and told him that they had seen armed men, and conceived
them to be the soldiers of Keba Christos. To this intelligence Tecla
Georgis answered, That Keba Christos was in the king’s palace at Dancaz
the 15th of November, and that it was impossible he then could be so
near with an army, if he had even wings to fly; but that the men they
had seen were probably reinforcements that he expected.

Keba Christos, on the contrary, hearing that the enemy was at hand,
drew up his army in three divisions. The first consisted of his own
household, the second of a body of horse of the king’s household,
called _the Koccob Horse_, or _Star Cavalry_, from a silver star which
each of them wears on the front of his helmet; and the third, of the
people of Tigré who had joined him. In this order he came in sight
of his enemy posted upon a small height, divided only from him by a
narrow plain. Tecla Georgis, convinced now that it was Keba Christos,
formed his army into two divisions; the one composed of a body called
_Tcheraguas_, the other of a body called _Sultan ba Christos_; with
these was a large corps of Galla which had lately joined them.

Keba Christos, now turning to his troops, briefly said, “My children,
I will not waste my time nor yours in discourse, or in telling you
what you are to do. You have all arms in your hands; you are good
Christians; and I can positively assure you there is not before you one
of your enemies that is not also an enemy to Christ.” Then, placing
himself before the Koccob horse, he pulled off his helmet and gave it
to his servant, saying, “By my naked face you shall know me to-day,
that I am not going in the midst of you as general or commander, but
foot for foot along with you like a common soldier.”

Upon having uncovered his head, he was quickly known by Tecla Georgis,
from whose troops a number of muskets was fired at him. But this had
so little effect upon this gallant officer, that, changing his place,
(which then was at the head of the second division) he placed himself
still nearer the enemy in the front of his own household troops, which
were the first; and the Galla charging them in that instant, he slew
their leader with his own hand. Upon the death of their commander,
these barbarians immediately fled, as is their custom, while Keba
Christos endeavoured to make his way to where Tecla Georgis was
employed keeping his troops from following so bad an example. But so
soon as that rebel saw his enemy approach him, he and his whole army
joined the Galla in their flight; tho’ he narrowly escaped, by the
swiftness of his horse, a light javelin, thrown by Keba Christos, which
struck him behind, but so feebly, by reason of the distance, that it
did not pierce his armour.

The king’s troops pursued vigorously, and soon brought to their general
the mule, the sword, and helmet of Tecla Georgis, with the heads of
300 slain in the battle, most of them Gallas, and with them 12 heads
of the most turbulent rebellious monks of Tigré. With these they also
brought Adera, sister to Tecla Georgis, wounded in the throat, who
had instigated him very strongly to commit the violences against the
professors of the Catholic religion. Tafa, too, his master of the
household, was taken prisoner; and it being made known to Keba Christos
that this man had assisted at the murder of Abba Jacob, he ordered him
directly to be put to death.

Tecla Georgis, aided by the strength of his horse and knowledge of
the country, escaped and concealed himself from his pursuers for four
days; but, on the Saturday that followed the victory, he was found in a
cavern with his great confidents, Woldo Mariam, and a schismatic monk
whose name was Sebo Amlac. Tecla Georgis was carried alive to Keba
Christos, who sent him to the king, his two companions being slain as
soon as found, and their heads accompanied their living master, which,
on their arrival at Dancaz, the king ordered to be hung upon a tree.

Tecla Georgis being convicted of sacrilege as well as murder, having
burnt the crucifixes and images of the saints, was condemned to be
burnt alive, and a lime-kiln was immediately prepared in which he was
to suffer. Upon hearing this, he desired a Catholic confessor, as
wishing to be reconciled to the church of Rome, and for this purpose
he sent a request to the patriarch, who was at three leagues distance,
and who dispatched Antonio Fernandes with full powers to absolve from
all manner of sins, and at the same time gave him orders to intercede
strongly with the king to pardon the criminal. Tecla Georgis confessed
publicly at the door of the church, and abjured the errors of the
church of Alexandria.

After this, the father Fernandes applied to the king, pleading strongly
for his pardon. To which the king answered, “Many reasons there are why
I should desire to pardon Tecla Georgis. To say no more, he has been
married to two of my daughters, and he has by them two sons, both good
soldiers and horsemen, who actually ride before me, and accompany me
in battle. I have therefore pardoned him all the affronts and injuries
he has done to me. But, were I to take upon myself to pardon the
affronts and insults he has offered the Divine Majesty, I should turn
the punishment of his sins upon myself, my family, and kingdom; and,
therefore, I refuse your petition, and order you to return forthwith to
Gorgora.”

After the departure of the father, in consideration that Tecla Georgis
had again embraced the Catholic religion, the king altered his sentence
of being burnt, into that of being hanged privately in the house where
he was then in prison; and, for that purpose, the executioner had
brought with him the cord with which Tecla had ordered the feet of Abba
Jacob to be tied. No sooner did he perceive that there were no hopes of
pardon, by their beginning to tie his hands, than he again, with a loud
voice, renounced his confession, declaring that he died an Alexandrian,
and that there was but one nature in Christ. The executioner
endeavoured to stop his further blasphemies, by drawing him up on the
beam in the room; but he resisted so strongly, that there was time to
inform Socinios of his abjuration: upon which the king ordered that
he should be hanged publicly upon a pine-tree; and he was accordingly
taken down, half-strangled, from the beam in the house, and hung upon
the tree before the palace.

Adera, his sister, was next examined; and it being clearly proved
that she had been a very active agent in the murder of Abba Jacob,
she likewise was condemned to be hanged upon the same tree with her
brother, fifteen days afterwards.

All that interval, the queen and ladies at court employed their utmost
interest with the king to pardon Adera, for they looked upon it as a
disgraceful thing, both to their sex and quality, that a woman of her
family should be thus publicly executed. All the ladies of the court
having joined, therefore, in a public petition to the king while on
his throne, he is said to have answered them by the following short
parable:--

“There was once an old woman, who being told of the death of an infant,
said, with great indifference, Children are but tender; it is no wonder
that they die, for any thing will kill a child. Being told of a youth
dying, she observed, Young people are forward and rash; they are always
in the way of some disaster; no wonder they die; it is impossible it
should be otherwise. But being told an old woman was dead, she began to
tear her hair, and lament, crying, Now the world is at an end if old
women begin to die, fearing that her turn might be the next. In this
manner all of you have seen Tecla Georgis die, and also several of his
companions, and you have not said a word. But now it is come to the
hanging of one woman, you are all alarmed, and the world is at an end.
Do not then deceive yourselves, but be assured that the same cord which
tied the feet of Abba Jacob, still remains sufficient to hang that sow
Adera, and all those that shall be so wicked as to behave like her, to
the disgrace of your sex, and their own rank and quality.”

The effects of these ostentatious acts of reformation soon produced
consequences which troubled their joy. The Agows of Lasta, called
Tcheratz Agow, who live at the head of the Tacazzé, rebelled. The
country they occupy is not extensive, but exceedingly populous, and was
supposed at that time to be able to bring into the field above 50,000
fighting men, besides leaving behind a sufficient number to defend
the passes and strong-holds of their country, which are by much the
most difficult and inaccessible of any in Abyssinia. They are divided
into five clans, Waag, Tettera, Dehaanah, Gouliou, and Louta, each
having an independent chief. They are exceedingly warlike; and, though
the country be so rude and rocky, they have a considerable number of
good horses; and are in general reckoned among the bravest and most
barbarous soldiers in Abyssinia. Their province abounds with all sorts
of provisions, and they rarely can be forced to pay any thing to
government in the name of tax, or tribute.

Tecla Georgis was now dead, but the cause of the rebellion still
subsisted. While governor of Begemder, he had connived at many abuses
of his officers who occupied the posts nearest to Lasta. These being
young men, from wantonness only, without provocation, had made many
different inroads, driving away cattle, and committing many other
excesses. The Agows carried their complaints to the governor, who, far
from hearing or redressing their wrongs, justified the conduct of his
officers, by making inroads himself immediately after; but coming to an
action in person with that people, he was shamefully beat, and a great
part of his army left dead upon the field.

This misfortune very much affected Socinios. Nor did the Agows
themselves doubt, but that a speedy chastisement was to follow this
victory over Tecla Georgis.

There was a youth descended of the royal family, who, to preserve the
freedom of his person, lived among the Galla, in expectation of better
times. His name was Melca Christos. To him the Agows applied, that,
with this prince of the house of Solomon at their head, they might wipe
off the odium of being reputed rebels, and appear as fighting under a
lawful sovereign for reformation of abuses. The renunciation of the
Alexandrian faith, forcibly obtruded upon them by Socinios, served
as cause of complaint. The Roman Catholic writers in the history of
this mission, say this was but a pretext, in which I conceive they are
right. I have lived among the Agows of Lasta, and in intimacy with
many of them, who are not, to this day, so anxious about Christianity
as to ascend one of their hills for the difference between that and
Paganism; and I am satisfied, for these 300 years last past there has
been scarcely a common layman in Lasta that has known the distinction
between the Alexandrian and the Roman church.

In the beginning of February 1629 the king marched from Dancaz
towards Gojam, where he collected an army of 30,000 men, which, with
the baggage, servants, and attendants, at that time very great and
numerous, amounted to above 80,000 men.

Socinios detached a number of small parties to enter Lasta at different
places. On the other hand, Melca Christos assembled his troops on the
most inaccessible rocks; whence, when he spied occasion, he came
suddenly down and surprised the enemy below. Among all the rude, high,
and tremendous mountains of which this country consists, there is one
especially, called by the name of _Lasta_. It is in the territory of
Waag, strongly surrounded with inaccessible precipices, having a large
plain on the top, abounding with every thing necessary, and watered by
a fine stream that never fails.

The manner in which the Agows remained secure in this strong post was
misconstrued into fear by the king’s army, which, in two divisions,
advanced to the attack of the mountain. That on the right had with some
difficulty scrambled up without opposition; but, being now arrived to
the steep part of the rock, such a number of large stones was rolled
down upon them from above, that this division of the army was entirely
destroyed. The number of stones on the brink of the precipices was
inexhaustible; and, once put in motion, pursued the scattered troops
with unavoidable speed, even down to the plains below. Among the slain
was Guebra Christos, the king’s son-in-law, dashed to pieces by the
fragment of a rock. The left division was upon the point of suffering
the same misfortune, had not Keba Christos come to their relief and
drawn them off, just before the enemy had begun to discharge this
irresistible artillery against them.

The king, thus shamefully beaten, retired to Dancaz, leaving the
entrances from Lasta strongly defended, lest these mountaineers should,
by way of retaliation, fall upon the province of Begemder. But the
late ill-fortune had dispirited the troops, and caused an indifference
about duty, a want of obedience, and a relaxation in discipline in the
whole army. Each of the detachments, therefore, one after the other,
left their post from different excuses, and returned home. The bad
consequence of this was now experienced. The Agows entered Begemder
spreading desolation everywhere. Melca Christos, no longer sculking
among the rocks of Lasta, planted his standard upon the plain, within
five days march of the capital where the king was residing.

The jealousies that had arisen between Socinios and his brother-in-law
Sela Christos, had been so much aggravated since the oath administered
by the patriarch, that the king had again deprived him of Gojam,
suffering him to live in obscurity in Damot, and among the Agows,
occupied, as the Jesuits say, in the conversion of that Pagan people,
by destroying their idols, which they represent to be a species of
cane or bamboo[61], and in forbidding the ceremonies of adoration and
devotion, which at stated times they paid to the river.

No remedy could be proposed, but the presence of Sela Christos, who,
upon the first warning, joined the king, and coming suddenly upon the
army of Lasta occupied in laying waste the low country of Begemder,
gave them such an overthrow that sufficiently compensated the first
loss of the king, and forced them again to take refuge among their
strong-holds in Lasta.

A misfortune of another kind followed this victory: Laeca Mariam, a
near relation to the king, was appointed governor of Begemder; but
no sooner did he see himself vested with that government, than he
meditated shaking off his allegiance to Socinios.

The king, after his last battle with the Agows, had named his son
Facilidas commander in chief of his forces; and, to secure him a
powerful and able assistant, he had first restored Sela Christos to his
government of Gojam, then sent him with an army to join Facilidas, and
command under him.

The success was answerable to the prudence of the measure; for,
immediately upon their arrival, they obliged Laeca Mariam to seek for
refuge in the mountains of Amhara, and, without giving him time to
recollect himself there, forced their way to the mountain to which he
had retired, and from which he and his followers had no way to escape,
but by venturing down a steep precipice; in attempting this, Laeca
Mariam fell, and was dashed to pieces, as were many others of his
followers; the rest were slain by the army that pursued them.

At this time, Facilidas began to attract the eyes of the nation in
general. Besides personal bravery, he had shewn great military talents
in the former campaign of Lasta. Though young, he was in capacity and
resolution equal to his father, but less warm, more reserved in his
temper and discourse. He was thought to be an enemy to the Catholic
religion, because he did not promote it, and neither exceeded nor fell
short of what his father commanded him. Yet, he lived with the Jesuits
on such an even footing, that they confess they did not know whether he
was their friend or enemy: he kept one of their number, called Father
Angelis, constantly in his household, where he was much favoured, and
constantly in his presence. He was thought to be an enemy to Sela
Christos, though he never had shewn it.

Facilidas received a flattering message from Urban VIII. but did not
answer it; nor does it appear his father ever desired him; for, through
the whole course of the life of Socinios, as his enemies are forced to
confess, he paid to his father’s will, the most passive obedience in
every thing. The tyranny, however, of church-government began to appear
unmasked; and it is probable that the king, though resolved to die a
Roman Catholic from principles of conscience, was indifferent about
forging for his son the chains he had himself worn with pain.

However this may be, the last step of placing Facilidas at the head
of the army was construed as another stroke of humiliation to the
Catholics, especially as it was followed with the removal of Keba
Christos (the support of that religion) from court, where he had been
appointed Billetana Gueta. It is true he was removed by what, in other
times, would have been called preferment; but things had now changed
their qualities, and places were not estimated, as formerly, by the
consequence they gave in the empire, but by the opportunities they
afforded of constant access to the king, and occasion of joining in
councils with him, and defeating those of their enemies.

Keba Christos being sent governor to Tigré, was to enter Lasta from
that quarter on the N. E. He is said to have received his appointment
with a great degree of concern, and to have told his friends, that he
foresaw he never was to return from that expedition, which he did not
regret, because he was convinced, by living much longer, it would be
made his duty to assist at the fall of the Catholic religion.

After having performed his devotions at Fremona, this general advanced
through Gouliou, a territory mostly inhabited by Galla, and destitute
of any sort of provisions; after which he took possession of the
mountains of Lasta, with a view to cover the march of the young prince
Facilidas, whom he every day expected. But that prince not appearing in
time, and provisions becoming scarce, no measure remained but making
his retreat to Tigré; and, although he formed the best disposition for
that purpose, the people of Lasta observing his intention in time, on
his first movement attacked his rear-guard while he was descending the
mountain, and put it to flight; being thereby masters of the higher
ground, they had the command of the cowardly soldiers below them, who
could not insure their destruction more certainly than by the indecent
manner in which they were flying.

Keba Christos, deserted by all except a few servants, continued
courageously fighting; and, although it was very possible for him to
have escaped, he disdained to survive the loss of his army. Receiving
at that time a wound from a javelin, which passed through his belly,
and judging the stroke to be mortal, he gave up all further resistance,
fell upon his knees to prayer, and was again wounded by a stone, which
struck him to the ground. Two of the mountaineers immediately came
up to him, one of whom did not know him, and contented himself with
stripping the body; but the other remembering his face, cut his head
off, and carried it to the rebel Melca Christos.

The misfortune was followed by another in Gojam, great to the nation
in general, and greater still to the Catholic cause in particular. At
the time that Sela Christos was in Begemder with prince Facilidas, the
Galla from Bizamo, supposing the province of Damot without defence,
passed the Nile, laying the whole province waste before them. Fecur
Egzie, lieutenant-general under Sela Christos, although he had with him
only a small number of troops, did not hesitate to march against those
savages, to endeavour, if possible, to stop their ravages. The Galla,
surprised at this, thought it was Sela Christos, and fled before him.
He had now pursued them almost alone, and lighted in a low meadow to
give grass to his horse, when he was surrounded and slain by a number
of the enemy that lay hid among the bushes, and discovered how ill he
was attended.

He was reputed a man of the best understanding, and the most liberal
sentiments of any in Ethiopia; a great orator, excelling both in the
gracefulness of manner and copiousness and purity of his language. He
was among the first that embraced the Catholic religion, even before
the king or Sela Christos, and was the principal promoter of the
translations of the Portuguese books into Ethiopic, assisted by the
Jesuit Antonio de Angelis. We have seen, in the year 1613, the great
efforts he made in the embassy to India by the coast of Melinda. He was
an excellent horseman, but more violent and rash in battle than could
have been expelled from a man of such mild manners.

There happened at this time another novelty. The king brought the
patriarch from Gorgora to Dancaz this year, at Easter, to hear that
feast celebrated, with the Ethiopic service amended, of which we have
already spoken abundantly. This countenance, so unnecessarily given
to an innovation that produced every day such very bad effects to the
Catholic interest, joined to many other circumstances, seemed clearly
to indicate a change in that prince’s mind.

The patriarch having made but a short stay at Dancaz, it was currently
reported a disagreement had happened, and that the king had sent
him prisoner to Gorgora; and this false report affected greatly the
weight the Catholics were supposed before to have had at court. But
the transaction that followed was of a nature to promise much more
consequences.

Socinios had a daughter called _Ozoro Wengelawit_, which means the
Evangelical, a name she certainly deserved not from her manners. This
lady was first married to Bela Christos, a man of rank at court, from
whom she had been divorced. She was next married to another, and then
(her two former husbands being still alive) to Tecla Georgis, who had
before married her sister, another of the king’s daughters. During this
marriage she had openly lived in adultery with Za Christos, who had
been married to her sister, a third daughter of the king. Za Christos
had been happy enough in preserving this lady’s esteem longer than
any other of her husbands, and nothing would content her now but a
marriage with her lover solemnly and publicly. For which purpose she
applied to the patriarch to dispense with the affinity between her and
Za Christos, arising from his having been married before to her sister.

It is not to be supposed that the patriarch would have resisted,
if nothing had stood in the way except the affinity: but weighty
impediments presented themselves besides; for either the first marriage
was valid, or it was not. If it was valid, then Wengelawit could not
marry Za Christos or any one else, because her husband was alive; nor
could she marry her second, nor Tecla Georgis, her third. If the first
marriage was not valid, then the second was, which husband was still
alive; and, in this case, a licence to marry was giving her liberty of
having three husbands at one time. The patriarch, for these reasons,
refused his authority to this manifold adultery and incest; nor could
he, notwithstanding the intercession of the whole court, ever be
brought to comply. His firmness (however commendable) greatly increased
the hatred to his person, and aversion to the church of Rome.

One day when the king was sitting in his apartment, a monk entered the
room, crying with a loud voice, “Hear the ambassador of God and of the
Virgin Mary!” The king, upon first sight of the man, expecting some
improper liberty might be taken, ordered his attendants to turn him out
at the door, and, being removed from his presence, to bring word what
he had to say, which was to this effect: “It is three days since I rose
from the dead. One day when I was standing in paradise, God called me,
and sent me with this message to you:--O emperor! says God, it is now
many years that I hoped you would amend of the great sin, the having
forsaken the faith of your ancestors. All this time the Virgin Mary was
kneeling before her blessed Son, beseeching him to pardon you; and,
upon the whole, it was agreed, that, unless you repent in a fortnight’s
time, you should be punished in such a manner that you will not forget
it presently.”

Socinios desired them to ask the man, “How it was possible that,
having so lately left the grave, his body should have so little of
the emaciated appearance of one long buried, and be now in such good
case, fat and fair?” To this he answered, “That, in paradise, he
thanked God there was abundance of every thing; and people were very
well used there, for he had lived upon good bread, and plenty of good
wine, biskets, and sweetmeats.” To which Socinios answered, “Tell him,
after the pains he had taken, it would be wrong in me to keep him long
from so good a place as this his paradise. Let him go and acquaint the
person who sent him, I shall live and die in the Roman Catholic faith;
and, in order that he may deliver the message quickly in the other
world, speed him instantly out of this, by hanging him upon the tree
before the palace-gate.”

The love of the wine, sweetmeats, and other celestial food, seemed to
have forsaken the ambassador. Upon hearing this message he recanted,
and was pardoned at the joint petition of those of the court that were
present, who concurred with the monk in thinking, that the message of
the emperor was an indecent one, and ought not to be delivered; that
having been in paradise once, was as much as fell to the lot of any
one man, and that he should therefore remain upon earth. The intended
catastrophe, then, of this singular ambassador was remitted; but the
truth of his mission was believed by the populace, and raised great
scruples in every weak mind.

The many misfortunes that had lately befallen the troops of the
king were accounted as so much increase of power to the rebel Melca
Christos, who, encouraged by the correspondence he held with the chiefs
of the Alexandrian religion, began now to take upon him the state and
office of a king. His first essay was to send, as governor to the
province of Tigré, a son of that great rebel Za Selassé, whose manifold
treasons, we have already seen, occasioned the death of two kings, Za
Denghel and Jacob.

Asca Georgis was then governor of Tigré for Socinios, a man of merit
and valour, but poor, and though related to the king himself, had very
few soldiers to be depended on, excepting his own servants, and two
bodies of troops which the king had sent him to maintain his authority,
and to keep his province in order.

The new governor, sent by the rebel Melca Christos, had with him a
considerable army; and, knowing the weakness of Asca Georgis, he
paraded through the province in the utmost security.

One Saturday which, in defiance of the king’s edict, he was to
solemnize as a festival equal to Sunday, he had resolved on a party
of pleasure in a valley, where, much at his ease, he was preparing an
entertainment for his troops and friends, and such of the province as
came to offer their obedience. Intelligence of this party came to
three Shum’s, commanders of small districts, two of them sons-in-law
of the king, the third a very loyal subject. These three sent to Asca
Georgis, to propose that, at a stated time, they should, each with his
own men, fall separately upon the son of Za Selassé, and interrupt his
entertainment.

This was executed with great order and punctuality. In the height of
the festival, the rebels were surrounded by an unexpected enemy. To
think of fighting was too late, nor was there time for flight. The
greatest part of the army was cut to pieces with little resistance.
The new governor saved himself among the rest by the goodness of his
horse, leaving Billetana Gueta, or chief master of the household of the
rebel Melca Christos, dead upon the spot, with about 4000 of his men.
Among the plunder were taken 32 kettle-drums, which alone were evidence
sufficient of the greatness of the slaughter.

Although the happy turn Socinios’s affairs had taken had given him
leisure to pass this winter at home, and in greater quiet than he had
done in former ones, yet the calm which it had produced was of very
short duration. The people of Lasta, perceiving some of the prince’s
army busy in destroying their harvest when almost ripe, came down
suddenly upon them from the mountain, and put them to flight with
very great slaughter. The blame of this was laid upon Sela Christos,
who might have prevented the calamity; and this accusation, with many
others, were brought against him to the king by Lesana Christos.

This man had been condemned to die for an offence, some time before, by
Ras Sela Christos; but having fled to the king, who heard his cause,
the sentence was reversed. Some time after this he fell into the hands
of the Ras, who put him to death upon his former sentence, without
regarding the late pardon of the king. This violent act became the
foundation upon which his enemies built many accusations, mostly void
of truth.

The king upon this took from him the government of Gojam, and gave
it to a young nobleman whose name was Serca Christos, supposed to be
a friend and dependent upon the prince Facilidas. Serca Christos was
no sooner arrived in his government than he resolved to rebel, and
privately solicited the young prince Facilidas to take up arms and
make a common cause against the king his father, in favour of the
Alexandrian church. At the time that the young man departed to his
government, Socinios had earnestly recommended to him, and he had most
solemnly promised, to protect the Catholic religion in his province,
and seemingly for this purpose he had taken with him a Jesuit named
Francisco de Carvalho.

Another affair which the king particularly charged him with was, the
care of a caravan which once a-year came from Narea. This, besides many
other valuable articles for the merchant, brought 1000 wakeas of gold
as tribute to the king, equal to about 10,000 dollars, or crowns of
our money: its whole way was through barbarous and lawless nations of
Galla till they arrived at the Nile; then through Gafats and Gongas,
immediately after having passed it.

Serca Christos, in his march, was come to a settlement of those
last-mentioned savages, where Gafats, Agows, and Damots, all in peace,
pastured immense flocks of cattle together. There are no where, I
believe, in the world, cattle so beautiful as those of the Gafats, nor
in such numbers. Large plains, for many days journey, are filled so
full of these that they appear as one market.

Serca Christos halted here to give grass to his horses; and, while this
was doing, it entered into his young head, that making prize of the
cattle was of much greater consequence than protecting the caravan of
Narea. Assembling then his cavalry, he fell upon the poor Gafats and
Damots, who feared no harm; and, having soon put them all to flight, he
drove off their cattle in such numbers, that, at Dancaz, it was said,
above 100,000 had reached that market.

The king, much shocked at this violent robbery, ordered Serca Christos
to give up the cattle, and surrender himself as prisoner. This message
of the king he answered in terms of duty and obedience; but, in the
mean time, went to the prince, and proposed to him to declare himself
king and champion of the church of Alexandria. Facilidas received him
with sharp reproofs, and he returned home much discontented. However,
as he had now declared himself, he resolved to put the best face upon
the matter; and, in order to make it generally believed that the prince
and he understood each other, he sent him publicly word, “I have
done what your highness ordered me; come and take possession of your
kingdom.” Upon which the prince ordered his messenger to be put in
irons, and sent to Dancaz to the king his father.

After this, Serca Christos ordered proclamation to be made that prince
Facilidas was king, at the palace of the governor of Gojam, which Sela
Christos had built near the convent of Collela. As one article of it
was the abolishing the Roman faith, the fathers ran precipitately into
the convent, and shut the doors upon themselves, fearing they should be
insulted by the army of schismatics: but a number of the Portuguese,
who lived in the neighbourhood, being brought into the church with
them, and there having been loop-holes made in the walls, and abundance
of fire-arms left there in deposit by Sela Christos, the rebel governor
did not choose to attempt any thing against them at that time. On the
contrary, he sent them word that he was in his heart a Roman Catholic,
and only, for the present, obliged to dissemble; but he would protect
them to the utmost, desiring them to send him the fire-arms left there
by Sela Christos, which they absolutely refused to do.

Serca Christos, apprehending that his army (if not acting under some
chief of the royal family) would forsake him on the first appearance of
the prince, had recourse to a child of the blood-royal, then living in
obscurity among his female relations, and this infant he made king, in
hopes, if he succeeded, to govern during his minority. There were many
who expected the prince would reconcile him to the king, especially
as he had yet preserved a shadow of respect for the Jesuits, and this
he imagined was one cause why the schismatics had not joined him in
the numbers necessary. In order to shew them that he designed no
reconciliation with the king, and to make such agreement impossible, he
adopted the same sacrilegious example that had so ill succeeded with
Tecla Georgis.

Za Selasse, a priest of Selalo, had been heard to say, when Serca
Christos was appointed to the government of Gojam, “There is an end
of the Catholic faith in this province.” Being now called before the
governor, he was forbid to say mass according to the forms of the
church of Rome. This the priest submitted to; but, being ordered to
deny the two natures in Christ, he declared this was a point of faith
which he would never give up, but always confess Christ was perfect God
and perfect man. Upon this Serca Christos ordered him to be slain; and
he was accordingly thrust through with many lances, repeating these
words, God and man! God and man! till his last breath.

Serca Christos had now drawn the sword, and thrown away the scabbard.
Upon receiving the news, the king ordered the prince, who waited
but his command, to march against him. The murder of Za Selassé had
procured an accession of fanatics and monks, but very few soldiers; so
that as soon as he heard with what diligence the prince was advancing,
he left his whole baggage, and fled into those high and craggy
mountains that form the banks of the Nile in Damot.

The prince pressed closely upon him, notwithstanding the difficulty of
the ground; so that no safety remained for him but to pass the Nile
into the country of the Galla, where he thought himself in safety. In
this, however, he was mistaken. He had to do with a general of the most
active kind, in the person of Facilidas, who crossed the Nile after
him, and, the third day, forced him to a battle on such ground as the
prince had chosen, who was likewise much his superior in number of
troops. But there was no longer any remedy; Serca Christos made the
best that he could of this necessity, and fought with great obstinacy,
till his men being for the most part slain, he was forced, with the few
that remained, to take refuge on a high hill, whence the prince obliged
him to deliver himself up to his mercy without condition.

Facilidas immediately dispatched news of his victory to court, and
fifteen days after, he followed himself, bringing Serca Christos,
with six of his principal officers and counsellors, loaded with heavy
chains. Being interrogated by the judges, What he had to answer for
his treasons? the prisoner denied that he had any occasion to answer,
because he had already received pardon from the prince. This excuse
was not admitted, the prince having disowned it absolutely. Upon which
he was sentenced to death; and, though he appealed to the king, his
sentence was confirmed.

It was too late to execute the sentence that night, but next morning
the seven prisoners were put to death. One of the principal servants
of Serca Christos being asked to confess and turn Catholic, abandoned
himself to great rage, uttering many curses and blasphemies against the
king, who, therefore, ordered him to be fastened upon a hook of iron,
where he continued his curses till at last he was slain by lances.

Serca Christos, cousin to Socinios, was treated with more respect. He,
with seeming candour, declared, that he would die a Catholic; and the
king, very desirous of this, gave orders to Diego de Mattos, a priest,
to attend him constantly in prison. After which, one night he sent five
of his confidential servants, who killed him privately, to prevent his
recantation.

Socinios had again taken Gojam from Sela Christos; which last disgrace
so affected him, that he desired to retire and live as a private man in
that province.

The king, having now no other enemy, all his attention was employed in
preparing for a campaign against Melca Christos of Lasta. But, as he
found his army full of disaffection, it was proposed to him, before he
took the field, to content them so far as to indulge the Alexandrians
in some rites of the old church; and a proclamation was accordingly
made by the king, “That those who chose to observe the Wednesday
as a fast, instead of Saturday, might do it;” and some other such
indulgences as these were granted, which were understood to affect the
faith.

As soon as this came to the ears of the patriarch, he wrote a very
sharp letter to the king, reproving him for the proclamation that
he had made; adding, that it was an encroachment upon the office of
the priesthood, that he, a layman, should take upon him to direct in
matters merely ecclesiastical. He warned the king, moreover, that God
would call him to the very strictest account for this presumption,
and reminded him of the words of Azarias the chief priest to king
Uzziah, and of the punishment of leprosy that followed the king’s
encroachment on the ecclesiastical function; and insisted upon Socinios
contradicting his proclamation by another.

Socinios so far complied, that the alteration made by the last
proclamation was confined to three articles. First, that no liturgy,
unless amended by the patriarch, was to be used in divine service.
Secondly, that all feasts, excepting Easter and those that depended
upon it, should be kept according to the ancient computation of time.
And, thirdly, that, whoever chose, might fast on Wednesday, rather than
on the Saturday.

At the same time, the king expressed himself as greatly offended at
the freedom of the application of the story of Azarias and Uzziah to
him. He told the patriarch plainly, that it was not by his sermons,
nor those of the fathers, nor by the miracles they wrought, nor by the
desire of the people, but by his edicts alone, that the Roman religion
was introduced into Ethiopia; and, therefore, that the patriarch had
not the least reason to complain of any thing being altered by the
authority that first established it. But, from this time, it plainly
appears, that Socinios began to entertain ideas, at least of the church
discipline and government, very opposite to those he had when he first
embraced the Romish religion.

The king now set out in his campaign for Lasta with a large army, which
he commanded himself, and under him his son, the prince Facilidas. Upon
entering the mountain, he divided his army into three divisions. The
first commanded by the prince, and under him Za Mariam Adebo his master
of the household, was ordered to attack, scale, and lodge themselves
on the highest part of the mountain. The second he gave to Guebra
Christos, governor of Begemder; and in this he placed the regiment, or
body of troops, called Inaches, veteran soldiers of Sela Christos, and
a small, but brave body of troops containing the sons of Portuguese:
These he directed to occupy the valleys and low ground. In the center
the king commanded in person.

The rebel chief and his mountaineers remained in a state of security;
for they neither thought to be so speedily attacked, nor that Socinios
could have raised so large an army. They abandoned, therefore, the
lower ground, and all took posts upon the heights. The prince advanced
to the first entrance, and ordered Damo, his Billetana Gueta, to force
it with four companies of good soldiers, who ascended the mountain with
great perseverance; and, notwithstanding the obstinate defence of the
rebels, made themselves master of that post, having killed two of the
bravest officers Melca Christos had, the one named Billene, the other
Tecla Mariam, sirnamed _defender of the faith_, because he was the
first that brought Galla to the assistance of Melca Christos.

There were likewise slain, at the same time, four priests and five
monks, after a desperate resistance; one of whom, calling the king’s
troops Moors, forbade them to approach for fear of defiling him, and
then, with a book in his hand, threw himself over the rock, and was
dashed to pieces in the plain below. Here the prince met with an enemy
he did not expect: The cold was so excessive, that above fifty persons
were frozen to death.

The top of the mountain, which was the second entry into Lasta, was
occupied by a still larger body of rebels, and, therefore, necessary
to be immediately stormed, else those below were in imminent danger
of being dashed to pieces by the large stones rolled down upon them.
The prince divided his army into two parties, exhorting them, without
loss of time, to attack that post; but the rebels, seeing the good
countenance with which they ascended, forsook their station and fled;
so that this second mountain was gained with much less loss and
difficulty than the first.

Behind this, and higher than all the rest, appeared the third, which
struck the assailants at first with terror and despair. This was
carried with still less loss on the part of the prince, because he was
assisted by the Inaches and Portuguese, who cut off the communication
below, and hindered one mountain from succouring the other. Here they
found great store of arms, offensive and defensive; coats of mail,
mules, and kettle drums; and they penetrated to the head-quarters
of Melca Christos, which was a small mountain, but very strong in
situation, where a Portuguese captain seized the seat which served as a
throne to the rebel; and, had not they lost time by falling to plunder,
they would have taken Melca Christos himself, who with difficulty
escaped, accompanied by ten horse.

To this last mountain Socinios repaired with the prince, and they were
joined by the governors of Amhara and Tigré, who had forced their way
in from the opposite side.

Hitherto all had gone well with the king; but when he had detached
Guebra Christos, governor of Begemder, with the Inaches and Portuguese,
who were at some distance, to destroy the crop, the mountaineers, again
assembled on a high hill above them, saw their opportunity, and fell
suddenly upon the spoilers, and cut all the soldiers of Begemder to
pieces. A considerable part of the Inaches fell also; but the rest,
joining themselves with the Portuguese in one body, made good their
retreat to the head-quarters.

The destruction of the corn everywhere around them, and the
impossibility of bringing provisions there, as they were situated in
the midst of their enemies, obliged the king to think of returning
before the rebels should collect themselves, and cut off his retreat.
And it was with great difficulty, and still greater loss, he
accomplished this, and retired to Dancaz, abandoning Lasta as soon as
he had subdued it, but leaving Begemder almost a prey to the rebels
whom he had conquered in Lasta.

Socinios being now determined upon another campaign against Lasta,
and for the relief of Begemder, ordered his troops to hold themselves
in readiness to march as soon as the weather should permit. But an
universal discontent had seized the whole army. They saw no end to this
war, nor any repose from its victories obtained with great bloodshed,
without spoil, riches, or reward; no territory acquired to the king,
nor nation subdued; but the time, when they were not actually in the
field, filled up with executions and the constant effusion of civil
blood, that seemed to be more horrid than war itself. They, therefore,
positively refused to march against Lasta; and the prince was deputed
by them to inform the king, that they did not say the Roman faith was
a bad one, as they did not understand it, nor desire to be instructed;
that this was an affair which entirely regarded themselves, and no one
would pretend to say there was any merit in professing a religion
they did not understand or believe: that they were ready, however, to
march and lay down their lives for the king and common-weal, provided
he restored them their ancient religion, without which they would have
no concern in the quarrel, nor even wish to be conquerors. Whether
the king was really in the secret or not, I shall not say; but it is
expressly mentioned in the annals of his reign, that Socinios did
promise by his son to the army, that he would restore the Alexandrian
faith if he should return victorious over Lasta; and the sudden manner
in which he executed this must convince every other person that it was
so.

The army now marched from Dancaz, upon intelligence arriving that the
rebels had left their strong-holds in Lasta, and were in their way to
the capital to give the king battle there. It was the 26th of July
1631 the king discovered, by his scouts, that the rebel Melca Christos
was at hand, having with him an army of about 25,000 men. Upon this
intelligence he ordered his troops to halt, and hear mass from Diego de
Mattos; and, having chosen his ground, he halted again at mid-day, and
confessed, according to the rite of the church of Rome, and then formed
his troops in order of battle.

It was not long till the enemy came in sight, but without shewing that
alacrity and desire of engaging they used to do when in their native
mountains. The king, at the head of the cavalry, fell so suddenly and
so violently upon them, that he broke through the van-guard commanded
by Melca Christos, and put them to flight before his foot could come
up. The rest of the army followed the example of the leader, and the
enemy were everywhere trodden down and destroyed by the victorious
horse, till night put an end to the pursuit.

Melca Christos, in the beginning of the engagement, saved himself by
the swiftness of his horse; but 8000 of the mountaineers were slain
upon the spot, among whom was Bicané, general to Melca Christos, an
excellent officer both for council and the field, and several other
considerable persons, as well inhabitants of Lasta as others, who had
taken that side from dislike to the king and his measures.

Next morning the king went out with his son to see the field of battle,
where the prince Facilidas is said to have spoke to this effect in name
of the army: “These men, whom you see slaughtered on the ground, were
neither Pagans nor Mahometans at whose death we should rejoice--they
were Christians, lately your subjects and your countrymen, some of them
your relations. This is not victory which is gained over ourselves. In
killing these you drive the sword into your own entrails. How many men
have you slaughtered? How many more have you to kill? We are become a
proverb even among the Pagans and Moors for carrying on this war, and
for apostatizing, as they say, from the faith of our ancestors.”--The
king heard this speech without reply, and returned manifestly
disconsolate to Dancaz; though many times before he had feasted and
triumphed for the gaining of a lesser victory.

After his arrival at Dancaz, he had a conference with the patriarch
Alphonso Mendes, who, in a long speech, upbraided him with having
deserted the Catholic faith at the time when the victory obtained by
their prayers gave him an opportunity of establishing it. The king
answered, with seeming indifference, that he had done every thing
for the Catholic faith in his power; that he had shed the blood of
thousands, and as much more was to be shed; and still he was uncertain
if it would produce any effect; but that he should think of it, and
send him his resolutions to-morrow.

The next day Socinios made a declaration by Za Mariam to the patriarch,
to this purport: “When we embraced the faith of Rome, we laboured for
it with great diligence, but the people shewed no affection for it.
Julius rebelled out of hatred against Sela Christos, under pretence of
being defender of the ancient faith, and was slain, together with many
of his followers. Gabriel did the same. Tecla Georgis, likewise, made a
league to die for the Alexandrian faith, which he did, and many people
with him. The same did Serca Christos the preceding year; and those
peasants of Lasta fight for the same cause at this day. The faith of
Rome is not a bad one; but the men of this country do not understand
it. Let those that like it remain in that faith, in the same way as the
Portuguese did in the time of Atzenaf Segued; let them eat and drink
together, and let them marry the daughters of Abyssinians. As for those
that are not inclined to the Roman faith, let them follow their ancient
one as received from the church of Alexandria.”

Upon this declaration, delivered by Za Mariam, the patriarch inquired
if it came from the king. Being answered that it did; after a little
pause, he returned this answer by Emanuel Almeyda, “That the patriarch
understood that both religions should be permitted in the kingdom, and
that the Alexandrians were to have every indulgence that could be
wished by them, without violating the purity of the Catholic faith;
that, therefore, he had no difficulty of allowing the people of Lasta
to live in the faith of their ancestors without alteration, as they had
never embraced any other; but as for those that had sworn to persist
in the Catholic faith, and had received the communion in that church,
by no means, without a grievous sin, could it be granted to them to
renounce that faith in which they had deliberately sworn to live and
die.”

The king, upon this answer, which he understood well, and expected,
only replied, “What is to be done? I have no longer the power of
government in my own kingdom;”--and immediately ordered a herald to
make the following proclamation:--

“Hear us! hear us! hear us! First of all we gave you the Roman Catholic
faith, as thinking it a good one; but many people have died fighting
against it, as Julius, Gabriel, Tecla Georgis, Serca Christos, and,
lastly, these rude peasants of Lasta. Now, therefore, we restore to
you the faith of your ancestors; let your own priests say their mass
in their own churches; let the people have their own altars for the
sacrament, and their own liturgy, and be happy. As for myself, I am now
old and worn out with war and infirmities, and no longer capable of
governing; I name my son Facilidas to reign in my place.”

Thus, in one day, fell the whole fabric of the Roman Catholic faith,
and hierarchy of the church of Rome, in Abyssinia; first regularly
established, as I must always think, by Peter Paez, in moderation,
charity, perseverance, long-suffering, and peace; extended and
maintained afterwards by blood and violence beyond what could be
expected from heathens, and thrown down by an exertion of the civil
power in its own defence, against the encroachments of priesthood
and ecclesiastical tyranny, which plainly had no other view than,
by annihilating the constitution under its native prince, to reduce
Abyssinia to a Portuguese government, as had been the case with so many
independent states in India already.

This proclamation was made on the 14th of June 1632. After this
Socinios took no care of public affairs. He had been for a long time
afflicted with various complaints, especially since the last campaign
in Lasta; and affairs were now managed by prince Facilidas in his
father’s place, though he did not take upon him the title of King.
Emana Christos, brother of Sela Christos, a steady Alexandrian, and
Guebra Christos, were then made governors of Lasta and Begemder; but no
steps were taken in this interval against the Jesuits.

On the 7th of September the king died, and was buried with great
pomp, by his son Facilidas, in the church of Ganeta Jesus, which he
himself had built, professing himself a Roman Catholic to the last.
The Portuguese historians deny both his resignation of the crown, and
his perseverance in the Roman Catholic faith to his death, but this
apparently for their own purposes.

He was a prince remarkable for his strength of body; of great courage
and elevation of mind; had early learned the exercise of arms,
patience, perseverance, and every military virtue that could be
acquired; and had passed the first of his life as a private person, in
the midst of hardships and dangers.

He is celebrated to this day in Abyssinia for a talent, which seems to
be the gift of nature, that of choosing upon the first view the proper
ground for the camp or battle, and embracing, in his own mind in a
moment, all the advantages and disadvantages that could result from any
particular part of it. This talent is particularly recorded in several
short proverbs, or military adages, such as the following: “Blind him
first, or you shall never beat him.” This most material qualification
seemed to have been in part transmitted to Ras Michael, the great
general in my time, descended from Socinios by his mother; and, by this
superiority alone over the other commanders opposed to him, he is said
to have been victorious in forty-three pitched battles.

Socinios embraced the Catholic religion from conviction, and studied it
with great application, as far as his narrow means of instruction would
allow him; and there can be no doubt that, under the moderate conduct
of Peter Paez, who converted him, he would have died a martyr for that
religion; and there seems as little reason to doubt, conscientious as
he was, if he had been a young man he would have quitted it for the
good of his country, and from his inability to suffer the tyranny of
the patriarch Alphonso Mendes, and his continual encroachment upon
civil government. Being, in the last years of his life, left without
one soldier to draw his sword for the Catholic cause, he kept his
religion, and abandoned his crown; and having been, it should seem, for
some time convinced that the government of the church of Rome, in such
hands as he left it, was incompatible with monarchy, he took no pains
to change Facilidas’s known sentiments, or to render him favourable to
the Roman faith, or to name another of his sons to succeed him whom he
found to be more so.

The Jesuits, considering only the catastrophe, and unmindful of the
strenuous efforts made to establish their religion during his whole
reign, have traduced his character as that of an apostate, for giving
way to the universal demand of his people to have their ancient form
of worship restored when his army had deserted him, and he himself was
dying of old age. But every impartial man will admit, that the step he
took, of abdicating his sovereignty over a people who had abjured the
religion he had introduced among them, was, in his circumstances, the
noblest action of his life, and just the reverse of apostacy.

This resignation of the crown, and his tenacious persevering in the
Catholic faith, together with the moderation of his son, the prince
Facilidas, in appointing a regency to govern, rather than to mount
the throne himself during his father’s life, are three facts which we
know to be true from the Abyssinian annals, and which the Jesuits have
endeavoured to suppress, that they might the more easily blacken the
character both of the father and the son.

They have pretended that it was the queen, and other ladies at court,
who by their influence seduced the king from the Catholic religion.
But Socinios was then past seventy, and the queen near sixty, and he
had no other wives or mistresses. To judge, moreover, by his behaviour
in the affair of Adera, sister to Tecla Georgis, the voice of the
women at court seems to have had no extraordinary weight with him. In a
word, he never varied in his religion after he embraced that of Rome,
but stedfastly adhered to it, when the pride and bad conduct of the
Jesuits, its professors, had scarcely left another friend to it in the
whole kingdom; and, therefore, the charge of apostacy is certainly an
unmerited falsehood.

As it is plain the Portuguese, from the beginning, believed their
religion could only be established by force, and were persuaded such
means were lawful, the blame of so much bloodshed for so many years,
and the total miscarriage of the whole scheme at last, lay at the
door of their sovereign, the king of Spain and Portugal; who, having
succeeded to his wish in his conquest of India, seems not to have had
the same anxiety the patriarch had for the conversion of Abyssinia,
nor even to have thought further of sending a body of troops with
his priests to the succour of Socinios, whom he left to the prayers
of Urban VIII. the merit of Ignatius Loyola, and the labours of his
furious and fanatic disciples.




  TRAVELS

  TO DISCOVER

  THE SOURCE OF THE NILE.


  BOOK IV.

  ANNALS OF ABYSSINIA,
  TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL.

  CONTINUATION OF THE ANNALS, FROM THE DEATH OF SOCINIOS
  TILL MY ARRIVAL IN ABYSSINIA.

[Illustration]




FACILIDAS, OR SULTAN SEGUED.

From 1632 to 1665.

    _The Patriarch and Missionaries are banished--Seek the
    Protection of a Rebel--Delivered up to the King, and sent to
    Masuah--Prince Claudius rebels--Sent to Wechné--Death and
    Character of the King._


As soon as the prince Facilidas had paid the last honours to his
father, he set about composing those disorders which had so long
distracted the kingdom by reason of the difference of religion.
Accordingly he wrote to the patriarch, that, the Alexandrian faith
being now restored, his leaving the kingdom had become indispensible:
that he had lately understood, that an Abuna, sent for by his
predecessor and by himself, was now actually on the way, and only
deferred his arrival from a resolution not to enter the kingdom
till the Romish patriarch and his priests should have left it; and,
therefore, he commanded the patriarch and fathers, assembled from their
several convents in Gojam and Dembea, to retire immediately to Fremona,
there to wait his further pleasure.

The patriarch endeavoured to parry this, with offering new concessions
and indulgencies; but the king informed him that he was too late; and
that he wished him to be advised, and fly, while it was time, from
greater harm that would otherwise fall upon him.

It was not long before the patriarch had revenge of Facilidas for this
intimation of the expectation of a successor in the person of the
Abuna. For on that very Easter there did arrive one, whose name was
Sela Christos, calling himself Abuna, who performed all the functions
of his office, dedicated churches, administered the sacrament, and
ordained priests. After continuing in office some months, he was
detected by a former companion of his, and found to be a man of very
bad character, from Nara, the frontier of Abyssinia, and that by
profession he had been a dealer in horses.

Facilidas then ordered his uncle, Sela Christos, to be brought before
him, received him kindly, and offered him again his riches and
employments. That brave man, Christian in every thing but in his hatred
and jealousy against his sovereign and nephew, refused absolutely to
barter his faith to obtain the greatest good, or avoid the greatest
punishment, it was in the power of the king to inflict. After repeated
trials, all to no purpose, the king, overcome by the instigation of
his enemies, banished him to Anabra in Shawada, a low, unwholesome
district amidst the mountains of Samen. But hearing that he still kept
correspondence with the Jesuits, and that their common resolution was
to solicit Portuguese troops from India, and remembering his former
oath, he sent orders to his place of exile to put him to death, and he
was in consequence hanged upon a cedar-tree.

Tellez, the Portuguese historian, in his collection of martyrs that
died for the faith in Abyssinia, has deservedly inserted the name
of Sela Christos; but professes that he is ignorant of the time of
his death, and under what species of torment he suffered. The only
information that I can give is what I have just now written. It was in
the beginning of the year 1634 he was carried to Shawada in chains, and
confined upon the mountain Anabra; but no mention is made of any other
hardship being put upon him than his being in irons, nor is more usual
in that kind of banishment. It was at the end of that year, however,
that he was executed in the manner above mentioned, being suspected of
having corresponded with the patriarch and Jesuits, and afterwards of
inciting his nephew Claudius to rebel, as, it appears, he had meditated
long before, and actually did very soon after.

The 9th of March 1633, the king ordered the patriarch to leave Dancaz,
and, with the rest of the fathers, to proceed immediately to Fremona,
under the conduct of four people of the first consideration, Tecla
Georgis, brother of Keba Christos, Tecla Saluce, one of the principal
persons in Tigré, and two Azages, men of great dignity at court. These
were joined by a party of soldiers belonging to Claudius, brother of
the king, supposed to have been in the conspiracy with Sela Christos
his uncle, to supplant his brother Facilidas by the help of the Jesuits
and Portuguese troops from India. But as soon as the patriarch had
fallen into disgrace, and Sela Christos lost his life, that prince
returned to the church of Alexandria, as did all the other sons of
Socinios; after which, Claudius seized to his own use all the lands and
effects that he found in Gojam, and was now by the king made governor
of Begemder. Under this escort the patriarch and his company arrived
at Fremona in the end of April 1633, after having been often robbed
and ill-treated by the way, the guards that were given to defend them
conniving with the banditti that came to rob them.

However strictly the fathers observed the precepts of scripture on
other occasions, in this they did not follow the line of conduct
prescribed by our Saviour--“And whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, when you depart out of that house or city, shake off
the dust of your feet.” They were not sheep that went patiently and
dumb to the slaughter; and, if their hearts, as they say, were full of
love and charity to Abyssinia, it was strangely accompanied with the
resolution they had taken to send Jerome Lobo, the most famous, because
the most bigotted Jesuit of the whole band, first to the viceroy of
India, and then to Spain, to solicit an army and fleet which were to
lay all this kingdom in blood.

The king was perfectly advised of all that passed. As he saw that the
patriarch endeavoured to gain time, and knew the reason of it; and, as
the fathers among them had a considerable quantity of fire-arms, he
sent an officer to the patriarch at Fremona, commanding him to deliver
up the whole of these, with gun-powder and other ammunition, and to
prepare, at the same time, to set out for Masuah. This at first the
patriarch refused to do. Nor did Facilidas punish this disobedience by
any harsher method than convincing him mildly of the imprudence and
inutility of such refusal, and the bad consequences to themselves.
Upon which the patriarch at last surrendered the articles required
to the officer sent by the king, but he resolved very differently as
to the other injunction of carrying all his brethren to Masuah. On
the contrary, he determined by every means to scatter them about the
kingdom of Abyssinia, and leave them behind if he was forced to embark
at Masuah, which he, however, resolved to avoid and resist to the
utmost of his power.

In order to do this, it was resolved that he should solicit the
Baharnagash (John Akay, then in rebellion) to take them under his
protection, and for that purpose to send a number of armed men, on a
night appointed, to meet them near Fremona, and carry them in safety
from any pursuit of the governor of Tigré. This project, extraordinary
as it was, succeeded. Akay promised them his protection. The patriarch
and priests, deceiving the guard the king had set upon them, escaped
in the night, and joined the soldiers of John Akay, commanded by Tecla
Emanuel, who was ready to receive them: They took refuge at Addicota,
the soldiers of the guard, though alarmed, not daring to pursue them in
the night, as not knowing the number and power of their protectors,
and fearing they might fall into some ambush.

It may not be amiss here to take notice, that this John Akay was the
very man with whom Tecla Georgis had associated for the murder of
Abba Jacob. He was a shrewd man, and had great power by living in
the neighbourhood of Sennaar, to which country he could retreat when
occasion required. He received the patriarch with great kindness.

Addicota is an inaccessible rock, perpendicular on all sides, excepting
where there is a narrow path by which was the entrance. Here the
patriarch thought he could continue in Abyssinia, in defiance of
Facilidas, till he should procure succours from India.

It was not, however, long before he found how little dependence there
was upon this new protector; for, in the midst of all his schemes, he
received orders to remove from Addicota, under pretence that they were
not there enough in safety; and Akay transferred them vexatiously from
place to place, into hot and unwholesome situations, always under the
same pretence, till he had destroyed their healths, and exhausted their
strength and patience.

There is but one way of disposing such people to grant a favour, and
it was surprising the patriarch did not find this out sooner. Jerome
Lobo was sent with a small present in gold, desiring they might have
leave to continue in their old habitation, Addicota. Lobo found John
Akay very much taken up in a pursuit that some ignorant monks had put
into his head. They had made him believe that there was a treasure hid
under a certain mountain which they had shewn him, but that the devil
who guarded it had constantly hindered his predecessors from acquiring
it. At present they had found out, that this devil had gone a journey
far off, was become blind and lame, and was, besides, in very great
affliction for the death of a son, the only hopes of his devilship’s
family, having now only a daughter remaining, very ugly, lame,
squinting, and sickly, and that all these reasons would hinder him from
being very anxious about his treasure. But, even supposing he did come,
they had an old monk that would exorcise him, a man as eminent for
wisdom as for sanctity.

In short, they produced a monk, one of their brethren, above a hundred
years old, whom they mounted upon a horse, then tied him to the animal,
wrapping him round with black wool, which, it seems, was the conjuring
habit. He was followed by a black cow and some monks, who carried beer,
hydromel, and roasted wheat, which was necessary, it seemed, to refresh
the devil after his long journey and great affliction, and put him in
good humour, if he should appear.

The old monk sung without ceasing, the workmen wrought vigorously, and
much earth and stones were removed; at last they discovered some rat,
mice, or mole-holes, at the sight of which a cry of joy was heard from
all the parties present.

The old monk sings again; the cow is brought in great hurry, and
sacrificed, and pieces of it thrown to the rats and mice: again they
fall to work with double keenness, the mole-holes vanish, and a hard
rock appears. This being the last obstacle, they fall keenly upon the
rock, and the old monk chants till he is hoarse with singing; the heat
of the sun is excessive; no gold appears; John Akay loses his patience,
and asks when it may be seen? The monks lay the whole blame upon him,
because, they say, he had not enough of faith. They give over work;
with one consent fall to eating the cow, and then disperse.

Father Jerome, takes the opportunity of this disappointment to abuse
the monks. He presents the Baharnagash with two ounces of gold, and
some other trifles, instead of the treasure which he was to get in the
mountain: he obtains the request he came to solicit, and the patriarch
and fathers return to Addicota.

Facilidas, informed of the asylum afforded to the Jesuits who had fled
from Fremona, applied to John Akay, promising him forgivenness of what
was past if he would deliver the priests under his protection. This
John Akay declined to do from motives of delicacy. It was breaking his
word to deliver his guests into the hands of the king; but, by a very
strange refinement, he agreed to sell them to the Turks. Accordingly
they were delivered for a sum to the basha of Masuah, who received them
with much greater kindness than they had experienced in the Christian
country from which they fled.

Two Jesuits were purposely left behind, with the consent of John
Akay, unknown to Facilidas, in fervent hopes that some occasion would
soon offer of suffering martyrdom for the true faith; and in this
expectation they were not long disappointed, all those who were left in
Abyssinia having lost their lives by violent deaths, most of them on a
gibbet, by order of Facilidas, the last of whom was Bernard Nogeyra.

Facilidas, weary of the obstinacy of these missionaries, uneasy also
at the suspicions they created, that a number of Portuguese troops
would be poured in upon his country by the viceroy of India, concluded
a treaty with the bashas of Masuah and Suakem, for preventing any
Portuguese passing into Abyssinia, by shutting these ports against
them. Not above eight years before, that is, in the year 1624, Socinios
had sent a zebra, and several other curious articles, as presents
to the basha of Suakem, with a request to him not to obstruct, as
the Turks had used to do, the entrance of any Portuguese into his
dominions. But those times were now so changed, that both nations,
Turks and Abyssinians, had resolved, with one consent, to exclude them
all, for their mutual safety, peace, and advantage.

This treaty with the Turks, made by Facilidas, probably gave rise
to that calumny of the Jesuits, that, for fear of a return of the
Portuguese, that prince had embraced the Mahometan religion, and sent
for preceptors from Mocha to instruct him in their tenets. This, I say,
if not founded upon the treaty I mention, was destitute of the least
shadow of truth; but, like other calumnies then propagated in great
number, arose solely from the rage, malice, and heated imaginations of
desperate fanatics.

Amidst the general regret this revolution in the church of Ethiopia
occasioned at Rome, there were some who thought the pride, obstinacy,
and violence of the Jesuits, the hardness and cruelty of their hearts
in instigating Socinios to that perpetual effusion of blood, and
their independence, their encroachments upon, and resistance of the
civil power, were faults resulting from the institutions of that
particular society, and that these occasioned the miscarriage; that a
well-grounded aversion to the teachers had created a repugnance to the
doctrines preached, and was the reason of the expulsion of the fathers,
and the relapse of Abyssinia to the Alexandrian faith. From this
persuasion, six capuchins, all of them Frenchmen of the reformed Order
of St Francis, were sent from Rome after the death of Nogeyra, by the
congregation _De Propagandâ Fide_, and these had protections from the
grand signior.

Two attempted the entering Abyssinia by way of the Indian Ocean, that
is, from Magadoxa, and were slain by the Galla, after advancing a very
short way into the country. Two of them penetrated into Abyssinia, and
were stoned to death. The remaining two, hearing the fate of their
companions at Masuah, and not being so violently bent upon a crown of
martyrdom as were the Portuguese missionaries, prudently returned home,
carrying with them the account of this bad success.

Three other capuchins were sent after this. It is impossible to judge
from their conduct what idea they had formed; for they themselves
gave the first information of their intended coming to Facilidas, who
thereupon recommended it to the basha to receive them according to
their merits; and thereupon, on their arrival at Suakem, their heads
were cut off by his order; the skins of their heads and faces stripped
off and sent to the king of Abyssinia, that, by their colour, he might
know them to be franks, and by their tonsure to be priests. Nor was
it possible afterwards to introduce any Catholic missionaries, either
during this or the following reign.

Facilidas having thus provided against being further disturbed by
missionaries, and having reduced all his subjects to the obedience of
the Alexandrian church, sent again messengers to bring an Abuna from
Cairo, while he took the field against Melca Christos his rival, who
continued in arms at the head of the peasants of Lasta, though there
was now no longer any pretence that the Alexandrian faith was in
danger. Both armies met in Libo, a country of the Galla, where a panic
seized the king’s troops, his horse flying at the first onset. The
royal army being entirely dispersed, Melca Christos pursued his good
fortune, and entered the king’s palace, took possession of the throne,
and was crowned; he appointed to all the great places in government,
and distributed a largess, or bounty, to his soldiers.

The Portuguese historians say, that this happened at Dancaz, not at
Libo. But they should have remembered what they before have said, that
an epidemic fever raged in all Dembea, so that the king was not at
Dancaz that year. He passed the winter of the preceding one at Dobit,
near Begemder.

The memoirs of these missionaries, even when they were in the country,
are to be read with great caution, being full of misrepresentations of
the manners and characters of men, magnifying some actions, slighting
others, and attributing to their favourites services that were really
performed by their adversaries; and, from the coming of Alphonso
Mendes, till they were banished to Masuah, great part of their account
is untrue, and the rest very suspicious. After their retiring to India,
which is the time we are now speaking of, the whole that they have
published is one continued tissue of falsehood and calumny, either
hear-say stories communicated to them, as they say, by the remnants
of zealots still alive in Abyssinia, or fabrications of their own,
invented for particular purposes. In continuing this history, I shall
take notice of some of these, though for facts I rely entirely upon the
annals of the country, treating, however, the Abyssinian account of the
Jesuits’ doctrines and behaviour with the same degree of caution.

This forwardness of his rival Melca Christos did not discourage
Facilidas. Without losing a moment, he sent expresses to Kasmati Dimmo,
governor of Samen, to Ras Sela Christos, of Damot, and to his brother
Claudius, governor of Begemder, ordering them to march and attack Melca
Christos, then acting as sovereign in the king’s palace at Libo.

These three generals were not slack in obeying the commands of
Facilidas. They surrounded Melca Christos before he expected them, and
forced him to a battle, in which he was defeated and lost his whole
army. He himself, fighting manfully at the head of his troops, was
slain hand to hand by Cosmas, a soldier of Kasmati Claudius, the king’s
brother.

Jerome Lobo mentions Facilidas’s bad success against the Gallas and
Agows as an instance of divine vengeance which pursued him. But if the
approbation or disapprobation of heaven is to be appealed to in this
reign as a proof of the justness of the measures taken, we must be
obliged to say the cause of the Jesuits was not the cause of heaven.
If we except the temporary advantage gained over Facilidas, and the
accident that happened to his army at Lasta, perpetual victory had
attended the wars in which this prince was engaged; for so far was he
from being unfortunate this campaign against the Agows, that, on the
9th of February 1636, he marched from Libo into Gojam, and totally
defeated the two great tribes Azena and Zeegam. After which he sent his
army with Kasmati Melca Bahar, who coming up with the Galla, a great
body of whom had made an incursion into Gojam, he totally overthrew
them, and passing the Nile into their country, laid it waste, and
returned with a great number of cattle, and multitudes of women and
children to be sold as slaves.

The king then returned to Begemder, and took up his head-quarters
at Gonsala; but, soon hearing that the Abuna Marcus was arrived, he
quitted that place, and came to meet him in Gondar.

The next year, which was the fifth of his reign, and the first of the
coming of Abuna Marcus, he again fought with the Agows, and beat the
Denguis, Hancasha, and the Zeegam, and passed that winter in Gafat;
nor was he ever unfortunate with the Agows or Galla. But a misfortune
happened this year (the 6th of his reign) which very much affected the
whole kingdom. The people of Lasta seemed to grow more inveterate
after the defeat they had received under Melca Christos. In the stead
of that prince slain in battle, they appointed his son, a young man of
good hopes.

Facilidas, trusting to his former reputation acquired in these
mountains in his father’s time, on the 3d of March 1638 advanced with
a large army into Lasta, with a design to bring these peasants to a
battle. But the rebels, growing wise by their losses, no longer chose
to trust themselves on the plain, but, retiring to the strongest
posts, fortified them so judiciously, that, without risking any loss
themselves, they cut off all supplies or provisions coming to the
king’s army.

It happened at that time the cold was so excessive that almost the
whole army perished amidst the mountains; great part from famine, but
a greater still from cold, a very remarkable circumstance in these
latitudes. Lasta is barely 12° from the Line, and it was now the
equinox in March, so that the sun was but 12° from being in the zenith
of Lasta, and there was in the day twelve hours of sun. Yet here is
an example of an army, not of foreigners, but natives, perishing with
cold in their own country, when the sun is no farther than 12° from
being vertical, or from being directly over their heads; a strong proof
this, as I have often remarked, that there is no way of judging by the
degrees of heat in the thermometer, what effect that degree of heat or
cold is to have upon the human body.

The eighth year of the reign of Facilidas, Claudius, governor of
Begemder, his brother, revolted and joined the rebels of Lasta. It
seems, that this prince had been long encouraged by the Jesuits, and
his uncle Sela Christos, in expectation of succeeding his father
Socinios, and supplanting Facilidas, his brother, in the kingdom. But,
after the banishment of the Jesuits, and the death of Sela Christos,
Facilidas thinking, these bad counsellors being removed, he would
continue firm in his duty, and willing to disbelieve the whole that had
been reported of his designs, made him governor of Begemder.

It happened, however, that this very year two Abunas arrived from
Egypt, one by way of Sennaar, the other by Dancali. Upon inquiry it was
found, that Abba Michael, the latter of these Abunas, had been sent for
by Kasmati Claudius, in expectation that he was to be on the throne by
the time of his Abuna’s arrival. This implied clearly that the king’s
death was agreed on. Claudius, without attempting a vindication, or
awaiting the discussion of this step, fled to Lasta, and joined Laeca,
son of Melca Christos, a youth then at the head of the rebels.

Facilidas banished Abba Michael to Serké, a Mahometan town in the way
to Sennaar, and admitted Abba Johannes, whom he himself had sent for
from Cairo, into the office of Abuna.

Soon after this, Claudius was surprised and taken prisoner, and brought
to the king, and, though stained in a high degree with ingratitude,
treason, and intended fratricide, he could not be brought to order his
execution, but, like a wise and merciful prince, reflecting on the
ancient usages of the empire, and how much royal blood might be daily
saved by sequestering the descendents of the imperial family upon the
mountain, he chose that of Wechné in Belessen, which served ever after
for this purpose.

This is the third mountain within the reach of written history, first
chosen, and then reprobated, as a state-prison for all the males of the
royal family, excepting the one seated upon the throne.

This interruption of the imprisonment of the princes for a time, and
the resuming it again for another period, have led the Portuguese
writers, very little acquainted with the history or constitution of
this country, into various disputes and difficulties, which I shall
fully explain and reconcile in their proper place. It is sufficient
for the present to observe, that Claudius was sent into exile to the
mountain of Wechné, and that he was the first prince banished thither,
where he lived for many years.

The king, finding that nothing material pressed at home, marched into
Gojam to Enzagedem, whence he sent Ras Bela Christos against the
Shangalla, N. W. of the country of the Agows. These people being put
upon their guard by their neighbours, all disaffected to the king,
contrived to place themselves in ambush so judiciously, that Bela
Christos, marching in security into their country, was surrounded by
the Shangalla, whom he thought yet at a distance. Great part of his
troops was slain by the arrows of the enemy, who, from their caves and
holes in the mountain, poured their missile weapons, stones, and arrows
on the troops, at so small a distance that every one took place, though
above the reach of swords, and lances, or such common weapons; others
were overpowered by large bodies of men sallying from the thickets, and
fighting them firmly foot to foot. Many officers were that day slain,
among the rest Alzaguè and Petros, two persons of great distinction
in the palace. But the king, however afflicted for the loss of his
men, well knew that this defeat would have no other consequences; so
returned to his capital, with resolution to make another vigorous
effort against Lasta.

The manner in which this expedition was prevented cannot but give us
a high idea of Facilidas: Laeca, at the head of an army of veteran
troops, whose affection he never had occasion to doubt, thought it
safer to trust to the generosity of a king, who had slain his father in
battle, than to the acquiring a crown that was not his, by persevering
any longer in rebellion. Accordingly he surrendered himself, without
condition, to Facilidas, who immediately committed him to prison, which
seeming severity, however, meant nothing further, than to shew him
the lenity which followed was entirely his own, and not suggested to
him by the officiousness of courtiers; for no sooner was he arrived
at Gondar, than he sent for Laeca from prison, received him not only
kindly, but with great marks of distinction; and, instead of banishing
him to Wechné, as he did his own brother Claudius, and which, as being
of the blood-royal, should have been his destination likewise, the king
entered into a kind of treaty with Laeca, by which he gave him large
possessions in Begemder near Lasta, and married him to his daughter
Theoclea, by whom, however, he had no children, but lived long in
constant friendship and confidence with Facilidas.

Except the events which I have already recorded, there is nothing
farther in this long reign worthy of being insisted upon; the early
inroads of the Galla, in plundering parties, and the seditions and
revolts of the Agows from the oppression and extortion of their
governors, were such as we find in every reign; and in all these
Facilidas was victorious, whilst the Hancasha and Zeegam were greatly
weakened in these campaigns.

Facilidas was taken ill at Gondar, in the end of October, of a disease
which, from its first appearance, he thought would prove mortal. He,
therefore, sent to his eldest son Hannes, whom he had constantly kept
with him, and who was now of age to govern, and recommended to him
his kingdom, and the persevering in the ancient religion. He died the
30th of September 1665, in great peace and composure of mind, and they
buried him at Azazo.

If we are obliged to give his father the preference, from the greater
variety of trials which he underwent, we must in justice allow, that,
after his father, Facilidas was the greatest king that ever sat
upon the Abyssinian throne. He had every good quality necessary to
constitute a great prince, without any alloy or mixture, that, upon so
much provocation as he had, might have misled him to be a bad one. He
was calm, dispassionate, and courteous in his behaviour. In the very
difficult part he had to act between his father and the nation, the
necessities of the times had taught him a degree of reserve, which, if
it was not natural, was not therefore the less useful to him. He was
in his own person the bravest soldier of his time, and always exposed
himself in proportion as the occasion was important.

To this were added all the qualities of a good general, in which
character he seems to have equalled his father Socinios, who else was
universally allowed to be the first of his time. Fierce and violent in
battle, he was backward in shedding blood after it. Though an enemy
to the Catholic religion, yet, from duty to his father, he lived
with the patriarch and Jesuits upon so familiar a footing, that they
confess themselves it was not from any part of his behaviour to them
they ever could judge him an enemy. He was most remarkable for an
implicit submission to his father’s commands; and, upon this principle,
fought in favour of the Catholic religion against his own friends and
persuasion, because such were the orders of his sovereign. He was of a
very mild and pleasant temper, as appeared by his behaviour to Melca
Christos, to his brother Claudius, to his uncle Sela Christos, and to
the patriarch and Jesuits.

It is true, that, of these last, Sela Christos, and many of the
Jesuits, were put to death in his reign; but this was not till they had
experienced repeated acts of mercy and forgivenness; still, persisting
in constant rebellion against government, they were justly cut off
as traitors and rebels by the civil power, in the very act of their
conspiracy against the life of the king and constitution of the country.

There is published by Tellez a letter of Alphonso Mendes, written, as
is falsely said, from Masuah, where it is dated, but truly from Goa.
If, as the patriarch pretends, he wrote it from Masuah, it is another
proof of this prince’s clemency, that he ever suffered the author of
such an indecent libel to return to India in peace. It is well known,
that, on the first requisition of Facilidas, the Turks would have
delivered the patriarch into his hands; and, every one that reads it
must allow, such language from a low-born priest to a king, deserved
every exemplary punishment offended royalty could inflict: It would not
have been mild, had such liberty been taken by a stranger in his native
country, Portugal.

The patriarch accuses Facilidas with the crime committed by Absalom,
which is, I suppose, debauching his father’s wives and concubines.
But, unluckily for the truth of this story, we have the Jesuit’s own
testimony, that Socinios had put away his wives and concubines before
he embraced the Catholic religion, so at his father’s death this was
impossible, unless he could commit incest with his own mother, who
was at that time a woman near sixty. But we shall suppose that they
existed, were never married, and, at the time of their being put away,
they were 18 years of age at an average. The king put them away in the
year 1621; and, therefore, in the year 1634, they would be 30 years of
age; and any body that has seen the effects that number of years has
upon Abyssinian beauty, must confess they could be no great temptation
to a prince.

The next calumny mentioned in this libel is, the murder of his brother
Claudius, nay, of all his brothers. Now we have seen, in the history of
his reign, that Claudius had fairly forfeited his life by a meditated
fratricide, and by an overt act of rebellion in which he was taken
prisoner. Yet so mild and placable was Facilidas, that he refused to
put him to death, but sent him prisoner to the mountain of Wechné, and
mercifully revived the ancient usage of banishing the princes of the
blood-royal to the mountain, instead of executing them, which had been
the practice to his time, and had occasioned the death of above sixty
of these unfortunate princes within the last hundred years.

To mount Wechné he also sent his own son David, and with him all his
brothers; and, so far from being murdered, we shall find them mostly
alive attending an extraordinary festival made for their sakes by
Facilidas’s grandson; an accident so rare, that it seems Providence had
permitted it in favour and vindication of truth and innocence, and to
stamp the lie upon the patriarch’s scandalous aspersions.

The third falsehood is, that Facilidas turned Mahometan, and got
doctors from Mocha to instruct him in the Koran. We have already seen
what gave rise to this, if it indeed had any foundation at all; but
it is a well-known fact, that, though he governed the church, during
a whole reign, mildly and judiciously, without any mark of bigotry,
never were two princes better affected to the Alexandrian church than
Facilidas and his son; and never were two that had better reason,
having both seen the disorders that other religions had occasioned.

We see throughout all this piece of the patriarchs, a self-sufficient
mind, gratifying itself by disgorging its passion and malice. If
Alphonso Mendes had no regard, as it seems indeed he had not; if he
had no reverence to higher powers, such as scripture had taught him
to have; if he was too enlightened, or too infatuated, to take our
Saviour’s precepts for his rule, and, shaking the dust of Abyssinia
from his feet, remit them to a Judge who will, at his own time,
separate good from evil, still he should have had, at least, a
brotherly love and charity for those unfortunate people who were to
fall into Facilidas’s hands; and we cannot reasonably suppose but that
the constant butcheries committed by the Turks afterwards upon the
Catholic priests, wild enough to enter at Masuah and Suakem, were the
fruits of the calumnious, intemperate libel of the patriarch.

After the death of the last missionary, Bernard Nogeyra, no
intelligence arrived of what was doing in Abyssinia, excepting from the
Dutch settlements of Batavia, where Abyssinian factors, or merchants,
had arrived; and where the industrious Mr Ludolf, very much engaged
in the history of this country, and who spared no pains, maintained
a correspondence, and thence he was informed that Facilidas had died
after a long and prosperous reign, and had left his kingdom in peace to
his son.

This intelligence alarmed the zeal of two great champions of the
Jesuits; the one M. le Grande, late secretary to the French embassy to
Portugal; and the other M. Piques, a member of the Sorbonne, a very
confused, dull disputant upon the difference of religion.

These two worthies, without any proof or intelligence but their own
warm and weak imaginations, fell violently upon poor Ludolf, accusing
him of falsehood, partiality, and prevarication; and, right or wrong,
they would have Facilidas plunged up to the neck in troubles, wading
through labyrinths of misfortunes, conspiracies, and defeats, certainly
dead, or about to die some terrible death by the vengeance of heaven;
and this ridiculous report is unjustly spread abroad by all the zealots
of those times. _Fata obstant_;--truth will out. The annals of the
country, written without a regard to either party, state, that, in the
long reign of Facilidas, notwithstanding the calamitous state in which
his father left him the empire, very few misfortunes only are reported
to have happened either to himself or lieutenants.

[Illustration]




HANNES I. OR ŒLAFE SEGUED.

From 1665 to 1680.

_Bigotry of the King--Disgusts his Son Yasous, who flies from Gondar._


If this prince succeeded to his kingdom in peace, he had the address
still to keep it so. He was not in his nature averse to war, though,
besides two feeble attempts he made upon Lasta, and one against the
Shangalla, all without material consequences, no military expedition
was undertaken in his time; and no rebellion or competitor (so frequent
in other reigns) at all disturbed his.

Hannes seems to have had the seeds of bigotry in his temper; from the
beginning of his reign he commanded the Mahometans to eat no other
flesh but what had been killed by Christians; and gathered together
the Catholic books, which the Jesuits had translated into the Ethiopic
language, and burned them in a heap. Much of his attention was given
to church matters, and, in regulating these, he seems to have employed
most of his time. He deposed the Abuna Christadulus, appointed by his
father, and in his place put the Abuna Sanuda.

This last measure seems to have displeased his eldest son Yasous, who
fled from the palace one night, and passed the Nile; and, though he was
followed by Kasmati Aserata Christos, he was not overtaken, but staid
some time in his sister’s house, and then returned to Gondar at the
request of his father.

A convocation of the clergy, the second in this reign, was now held,
and great heats and divisions followed among two orders of monks,
those of Eustathius and those of Debra Libanos. The king seems to have
assisted at all these debates, and to have contented himself with
holding the balance in his hands without declaring for either party.
But these altercations and disputes could not satisfy the active spirit
of the prince his son, who again fled from his father and from Gondar,
but was overtaken at the river Bashilo, and brought back to the palace,
where he found his father ill.

Hannes died the 19th of July, and was buried at Tedda, after having
reigned 15 years. He seems, from the scanty memorials of his long
reign, to have been a weak prince; but, perhaps, if the circumstances
of the times were fully known, he may have been a wise one.

[Illustration]




YASOUS I.

From 1680 to 1704.

    _Brilliant Expedition of the King to Wechné--Various Campaigns
    against the Agows and Galla--Comet appears--Expedition against
    Zeegam and the Eastern Shangalla--Poncet’s Journey--Murat’s
    Embassy--Du Roule’s Embassy--Du Roule assassinated at
    Sennaar--The King is assassinated._


Yasous succeeded his father Hannes with the approbation of the whole
kingdom. He had, as we have seen, twice in Hannes’s life-time absconded
from the palace; and this was interpreted as implying an impatience to
reign. But I rather think the cause was a difference of manners, his
father being extremely bigotted, sordid, and covetous; for he never, in
those elopements, pretended to make a party contrary to his father’s
interest, nor shewed the least inclination to give either the army or
the people a favourable impression of himself, to the disadvantage of
the king. There was, besides, a difference in religious principles.
Yasous had a great predilection for the monks of Debra Libanos, or
the high church; while Hannes, his father, had done every thing in his
power to instil into his son a prepossession in favour of those of Abba
Eustathius.

To these opinions, therefore, so widely different, as well in
religion as the things of the world, I attribute the young prince’s
disinclination to live with his father. This seems confirmed by the
first step he took upon his mounting the throne, which was to make an
alteration in the church government from what his father had left it at
his death.

It was on the 7th of July 1680 he was proclaimed king; the next day
he deposed the Acab Saat Constantius, and gave his place to Asera
Christos. He then called a council of the clergy on the 27th of
September, when he deposed Itchegué Tzaga Christos, and in his room
named Cyriacus.

It was now the time that, according to custom, he was to make his
profession in regard to the difference I have formerly mentioned that
subsisted between the two parties about the incarnation of Christ.
But this he refused to do in the present state of the church, as
there was then no certain Abuna in Abyssinia. For Hannes, before he
died, had written to the patriarch of Alexandria to depose both Abuna
Christodulus and Marcus, who, in case of death, was to have succeeded
him, and this under pretence that he had varied in his faith between
the two contending parties.

Hannes, therefore, desired the patriarch to appoint Abuna Sanuda,
a man known to be devoted to the monks of St Eustathius and their
tenets; whereas the other two priests were supposed to be inclined to
the monks of Debra Libanos. Yasous told his clergy that he would not
suffer Sanuda to be elected; and the assembly, with little opposition,
conformed to the sentiments of the king, who sent immediately thereupon
to Cairo, demanding peremptorily that Marcus might be appointed Abuna,
and declaring his resolution to admit no other. He then ordered the
church of Tecla Haimanout to be consecrated with great solemnity; he
repaired and adorned it with much magnificence, and endowed it with
lands, which increased its revenue very considerably.

These two circumstances (especially the last) shewed distinctly to the
whole kingdom his affection for the high church, as explicitly as any
proclamation could have done. And in this he continued steady during
his whole life, notwithstanding the many provocations he met with from
that restless body of men.

Having thus settled the affairs of the church, he proceeded to those
of the state, and appointed Anastasius (then governor of Amhara) to be
Ras, or lieutenant-general, in his whole kingdom, allowing him also to
keep his province of Amhara. In this he shewed a wisdom and penetration
that gained him the good opinion of every one; for Anastasius was a
man advanced in years, of great capacity and experience, and of a most
unblemished character among his neighbours, who, in all their own
affairs, had recourse to, and were determined by, his counsels.

The king then took a journey of a very extraordinary nature, and such
as Abyssinia had never before seen. Attended only by his nobility, of
whom a great number had flocked to him, he sat down at the foot of the
mountain of Wechné, and ordered all the princes of the royal family who
were banished, and confined there, to be brought to him.

During the last reign, the mountain of Wechné, and those forlorn
princes that lived upon it, had been, as it were, totally forgotten.
Hannes having sons of an age fit to govern, and his eldest son Yasous
living below with his father, no room seemed to remain for attempting
a revolution, by the young candidates escaping from the mountain. This
oblivion to which they were consigned, melancholy as it was, proved
the best state these unhappy prisoners could have wished; for to be
much known for either good or bad qualities, did always at some period
become fatal to the individuals. Punishment always followed inquiries
after a particular prince; and all messages, questions, or visits, at
the instance of the king, were constantly fore-runners of the loss of
life, or amputation of limbs, to these unhappy exiles. To be forgotten,
then, was to be safe; but this safety carried very heavy distress along
with it. Their revenues were embezzled by their officers or keepers,
and ill paid by the king; and the sordid temper of Hannes had often
reduced them all to the danger of perishing with hunger and cold.

Yasous, as he was well acquainted with all these circumstances, so he
was, in his nature and disposition, as perfectly willing to repair
the injuries that were past, and prevent the like in future. Nothing
tended so much to conciliate the minds of the people to their sovereign
as this behaviour of Yasous.

In the midst of his relations there now appeared (as risen from the
dead) Claudius, son of Socinios, the first exile who was sent to the
mountain of Wechné by his brother Facilidas, grandfather of Yasous.
This was the prince who, as we have already stated, was fixed upon
by the Jesuits to succeed his father, and govern that country when
converted to the Romish religion by their intrigues, and conquered by
the arms of the Portuguese: This was the prince who, to make their
enemies appear more odious, these Jesuits have asserted was slain
by his brother Facilidas, one instance by which we may judge of the
justice of the other charges laid against that humane, wise, and
virtuous prince, whose only crime was an inviolable attachment to the
religion and constitution of his country, and the just abhorrence
he most reasonably had, as an independent prince, to submit the
prerogatives of his crown, and the rights of his people to the blind
controul of a foreign prelate.

There came from the mountain also the sons of Facilidas, with their
families; and likewise his own brothers, Ayto Theophilus, and Ayto
Claudius, sons of his father Hatzè Hannes. The sight of so many noble
relations, some advanced in years, some in the flower of their youth,
and some yet children; all, however, in tatters, and almost naked,
made such an impression on the young king that he burst into tears.
Nor was his behaviour to the respective degrees of them less proper or
engaging. To the old he paid that reverence and respect due to parents;
to those about his own age, a kind and liberal familiarity; while he
bestowed upon the young ones caresses and commendations, sweetened with
the hopes that they might see better times.

His first care was to provide them all plentifully with apparel and
every necessary. His brothers he dressed like himself, and his uncles
still more richly. He then divided a large sum of money among them all.

In the month of December, which is the pleasantest season of the whole
year, the sun being moderately hot, the sky constantly clear and
without a cloud, all the court was encamped under the mountain, and the
inferior sort strewed along the grass. All were treated at the expence
of the king, passing the day and night in continual festivals. It is
but right, said the king, that I should pay for a pleasure so great
that none of my predecessors ever dared to taste it; and of all that
noble assembly none seemed to enjoy it more sincerely than the king.
All pardons solicited for criminals at this time were granted. In this
manner having spent a whole month, before his departure the king called
for the deftar, (_i. e._ the treasury book) in which the account of
the sum allowed for the maintenance of these prisoners is stated; and
having inquired strictly into the expenditure, and cancelled all grants
that had been made of any part of that sum to others, and provided
in future for the full, as well as yearly payment of it, he, for his
last act, gave to the governor of the mountain a large accession of
territory, to make him ample amends for the loss of the dues he was
understood to be intitled to from that revenue. After this, he embraced
them all, assuring them of his constant protection; and, mounting his
horse, he took the keeper along with him, leaving all the royal family
at their liberty at the foot of the mountain.

This last mark of confidence, more than all the rest, touched the minds
of that noble troop, who hurried every man with his utmost speed to
restore themselves voluntarily to their melancholy prison, imputing
every moment of delay as a step towards treason and ingratitude to
their munificent, compassionate, and magnanimous benefactor. All their
way was moistened with tears flowing from sensible and thankful hearts;
and all the mountain resounded with prayers for the long life and
prosperity o£ the king, and that the crown might never leave the lineal
descendents of his family. It was very remarkable, that, during this
long reign, though he was constantly involved in war, no competitor
from the mountain ever appeared in breach of those vows they had so
voluntarily undertaken.

There was another great advantage the king reaped by this generous
conduct. All the most powerful and considerable people in the kingdom
had an opportunity, at one view, to see each individual of the royal
family that was capable of wearing the crown, and all with one voice
agreed, upon the comparison made, that, if they had been then assembled
to elect a king, the choice would not have fallen upon any but the
present.

Though the country of the Agows of Damot is generally plain and laid
out in pasture, each tribe has some mountain to which, upon the
alarm of an enemy, they retire with their flocks. The Galla, being
their neighbours on the other side of the Nile to the south, and the
Shangalla in the low country immediately to the west, these natural
fortresses are frequently of the greatest use during the incursions of
both.

They alone, of all the nations of Abyssinia, have found it their
interest so far to cultivate their neighbours the Shangalla, that there
are places set apart in which both nations can trade with each other in
safety; where the Agows sell copper, iron, beads, skins, or hides, and
receive an immense profit in gold; for, below these to the south and
west, is the gold country nearest Abyssinia, none of that metal being
anywhere found in Abyssinia itself.

Yasous, from this country of the Agows, descended into that of the
Shangalla; where, conforming to the ancient custom of Abyssinia, he
hunted the elephant and rhinoceros, the ordinary first expedition in
the kings his predecessors reigns, but the second in his; the first
having been (as before stated) spent in charity and mercy, much more
nobly, at the foot of the mountain of Wechné.

Yasous is reported to have been the most graceful and dexterous
horseman of his time. He distinguished himself in this hunting as much
for his address and courage against the beasts, as he had, for a short
while before, done by his affability, generosity, and benevolence,
amidst his own family. All was praise, all was enthusiasm, wherever the
young king presented himself; the ill-boding monks and hermits had not
yet dared to foretel evil, but every common mouth predicted this was to
be an active, vigorous, and glorious reign, without being thought by
this to have laid any pretension to the gift of prophecy.

It was now the second year of his reign when the king took the field
with a small, but very well chosen army. The Edjow and Woolo, two of
the most powerful tribes of southern Galla, taking advantage of the
absence of Ras Anastasius, had entered Amhara by a pass, on the side
of which is situated Melec Shimfa, one of the principal towns of the
province.

The king, leaving old Anastasius to the government of Gondar, took
upon himself the relief of Amhara; and, being joined by all the
troops in his way, he arrived at Melec Shimfa before the Galla had
any intelligence of him. The Galla always chose for their residence
a very level country, because they are now become all horsemen. The
country of Amhara, on the contrary, is full of high mountains, and
only accessible by certain narrow passes. The king, therefore, instead
of marching directly to the enemy, passed above them, and left them
still advancing, burning the villages and churches in the country
below. He then took possession of the pass (through which he knew they
must retreat) with a strong body of troops; and filled the entrance
of the defile, which was very rugged ground, with fusileers, and his
best foot armed with lances: after this, he separated his horse into
two divisions, and, reserving one half to himself, gave the other to
Kasmati Demetrius. He then placed the troops conducted by himself in
a wood, about half a mile from the entrance of the pass, and ordered
Demetrius to fall upon the Galla briskly on the plain, but to retreat
as if terrified by their numbers, and to make the best of his way then
to the pass in the mountains.

Demetrius, finding the enemy’s parties scattered wide wasting the
country, fell upon them, and slew many, till he had arrived near the
middle of their body, when the Galla, used to such expeditions, poured
in from all sides, and presently united. Demetrius, surrounded on every
side, was slain, fighting to the last in the most desperate manner, and
his party, much diminished in number, fled in a manner that could not
be mistaken for stratagem. They were closely pursued, and followed into
the pass by the Galla, who thought they had thus entirely cut them off
from Amhara. But they were soon received by a close fire from the foot
among the bushes, and by the lances that mingled with them from every
side of the mountain.

The king, upon the first noise of the musquetry, advanced quickly with
his horse, and met the Galla, in the height of their confusion, flying
back again into the plain. Here they fell an easy sacrifice to the
fresh troops led by Yasous, and to the peasants, exasperated by the
havoc they before had made in the country. Of the enemy, about 6000
men fell this day on the field; a few were brought to Gondar, and, in
contempt, sold for slaves. Few on the king’s side were slain, excepting
those that fell with Demetrius, the account of whose death the king
heard without any signs of regret:--“I told the man (says the king)
that he should shew himself and retire; if I wanted a victory I would
have led the army in person; I march against the Galla, not as a king,
but as an executioner, because my aim is to extirpate them.”

Although Yasous was stedfast in his own opinion as to his religion, or,
as it may be more properly called, the disputes and quibbles with the
monks concerning it, yet he suffered each sect to enjoy its own, and,
probably, in his heart he perfectly despised both.

The monks, however, were far from possessing any such spirit of
toleration. They considered the deposing of Acab Saat, Constantius,
and the Itchegué Tzaga Christos, as a declaration of dislike the king
entertained towards their party. They bore with great impatience and
indignation, that Abuna Sanuda, who was once their zealous partizan
in the time of Hannes, should now suddenly change his sentiments, and
declare implicitly for those of the king, and thereby increase both the
number and the consequence of their adversaries. They declared that
they would suffer every thing rather than live under a king who shewed
himself so openly a favourer of Debra Libanos, though it was now but
their turn, having in the last reign had a king more partial, and more
attached to St Eustathius, than ever Yasous was to any set of monks
whatever.

The ringleaders in all these seditious declarations were Abba Tebedin,
superior of the monastery of Gondga, and Kasmati Wali of Damot, by
origin a Galla. These two turbulent men, having first drawn over to
their party the Agows and province of Damot, passed over the Nile
to Goodero and Basso, whom they joined, and then proclaimed king
one Isaac, grandson of Socinios a prince, who was never sent to the
mountain, but whose predecessors, being at liberty when Facilidas
first banished his brothers and children to Wechné, had fled to the
Galla, and there remained in obscurity, waiting the juncture which now
happened to declare his royal descent, and offer himself for king.

The Galla, who sought but a pretence for invading Abyssinia, readily
embraced this opportunity, and swarmed to him on all sides. His army,
in a very short time, was exceedingly numerous, and the Agows and all
Damot were ready to join him when he should repass the Nile. This
revolt was indeed likely to have proved general, but for the activity
and diligence of the king, who, on the first intelligence, put himself
so suddenly in motion that he was on the banks of the Nile before
the Galla on the one side were ready for their junction with the
confederates on the other.

The king’s presence imposed upon the Agows and the rebels of Damot,
so that they let him pass quietly over the Nile into the country of
the Galla, hoping that, as their designs were not discovered, he might
again return through their country in peace if victorious over the
Galla; but, if he was beaten, they then were ready to intercept him.

But the Galla, who expected that they would have had to fight with an
army already fatigued and half-ruined by an action with the Agows on
the other side of the river, no sooner saw it pass the Nile unmolested
in full force, than they began to think how far it was from their
interest to make their country a seat of war, when so little profit was
to be expected. On the approach, therefore, of the king’s army, many
of them deserted to it, and made their peace with him. The few that
remained faithful to Isaac were dispersed after very little resistance;
and he himself being taken prisoner, and brought before the king, was
given up to the soldiers, who put him to death in his presence. On the
king’s side, no person of consideration was slain but Kasmati Maziré,
and very few on the part of the enemy.

This year 1685, the 5th of Yasous’s reign, there was no military
expedition. He had pardoned Abba Tebedin, and Kasmati Wali, and the
monks again desired an assembly of the clergy, which was granted. But
the king seeing, at its first meeting, that it was to produce nothing
but wrangling and invectives; with great calmness and resolution told
the assembly, “That their disputes were of a nature so confused and
unedifying, that he questioned much their being really founded in
scripture; and the rather so, because the patriarch of Alexandria
seemed neither to know, nor concern himself about them, nor was the
Abuna, at his first coming, ever instructed on any one of these
points. If they were, however, founded in scripture, one of them was
confessedly in the wrong; and, if so, he doubted it might be the case
with both; that he had, therefore, come to a resolution to name several
of the best-qualified persons of both parties, who, in the presence of
the Itchegué and Abuna, might inspect the books, and from them settle
some premises that might be hereafter accepted and admitted as _data_
by both.”

This being assented to, the very next year he ordered two of the
priests of Debra Libanos then at Gondar, together with Abba Tebedin,
Cosmas of Aruana, the Abuna Sanuda, and the Itchegué, forthwith to
repair to Debra Mariam, an island in the lake Tzana, where, sequestered
from the world, they might discuss their several opinions, and settle
some points admissible by both sides. After which, without giving any
opportunity for reply, he dissolved the assembly, and took the field
with his army.

The king, though perfectly informed of the part that the whole province
of Damot had taken in the rebellion of Isaac, as also great part of
the Agows, but most of all that tribe called Zeegam, yet had so well
dissembled, that most of them believed he was ignorant of their fault,
and all of them, that he had no thoughts of punishing them, for he had
returned through Damot, after the defeat of Isaac, without shewing
any mark of anger, or suffering his troops to commit the smallest
hostility. He now passed in the same peaceable manner through the
country of Zeegam, intending to attack the Shangalla of Geesa and
Wumbarea.

These two tribes are little known. Like the other Shangalla they are
Pagans, but worship the Nile and a certain tree, and have a language
peculiar to themselves. They are woolly-headed, and of the deepest
black; very tall and strong, straighter and better-made about the
legs and joints than the other blacks; their foreheads narrow, their
cheekbones high, their noses flat, with wide mouths, and very small
eyes. With all this they have an air of chearfulness and gaiety which
renders them more agreeable than other blacks. Their women are very
amorous, and sell at a much greater price than other blacks of the sex.

This country is bounded on the south by Metchakel; on the west by the
Nile; the east by Serako, part of Guesgué and Kuara; and, on the north,
by Belay, Guba, and the Hamidge[62] of Sennaar. They make very frequent
inroads, and surprise the Agows, whose children they sell at Guba to
the Mahometans, who traffic there for gold and slaves, and get iron and
coarse cotton-cloths in return. Their country is full of woods, and
their manner of life the same as has been already described in speaking
of the other tribes.

The Geesa live close upon the Nile, to which river they give their
own name. It is also called Geesa by the Agows, in the small district
of Geesh, where it rises from its source. They never have yet made
peace with Abyssinia, are governed by the heads of families, and live
separately for the sake of hunting, and, for this reason, are easily
conquered. The men are naked, having a cotton rag only about their
middle. The nights are very cold, and they lie round great fires; but
the fly is not so dangerous here as to the eastward, so that goats, in
a small number, live here. Their arms are bows, lances, and arrows;
large wooden clubs, with knobs, nearly as big as a man’s head, at the
end of them; their shields are oval. They worship the Nile, but no
other river, as I have said before; it is called Geesa, which, in their
language, signifies the first Maker, or Creator. They imagine its water
is a cure for most diseases.

East of the Geesa is Wumbarea, which reaches to Belay. The king fell
first on the Geesa, part of whom he took, and the rest he dispersed. He
then turned to the right through Wumbarea, and met with some resistance
in the narrow passes in the mountains, in one of which Kasmati Kosté,
(one of his principal officers) a man of low birth, but raised by his
merit to his present rank, was slain by an arrow.

The king then repassed the Agows of Zeegam, in the same peaceable
manner in which he came, and then marched on without giving any cause
of suspicion, taking up his quarters at Ibaba. It was here he had
appointed an assembly of the clergy to meet, before whom the several
delegates, chosen to consider the controverted points, and find some
ground for a reconciliation, were to make their report. The Abuna,
Itchegué, and all those who, for this purpose, were shut up in Debra
Mariam, appeared before the king. But, however amicably things had been
carried on while they were shut up in the island, the usual warmth and
violence prevailed before the assembly. Ayto Christos, Abba Welled
Christos of Debra Libanos, on one side, and Tebedin and Cosmas on the
other, fell roundly, and without preface, upon a dispute about the
incarnation, so that the affair from argument was likely to turn to
sedition.

The turbulent Tebedin, leaving the matter of religion wholly apart,
inveighed vehemently against the retirement to Debra Mariam, which he
loudly complained of as banishment. Ras Anastasius and Abuna Sanuda
reproved him sharply for the freedom with which he taxed this measure
of the king, and in this they were followed by many of the wiser sort
on both sides. Immediately after the assembly, the king ordered Tebedin
to be put in irons, and sent to a mountainous prison. He then returned
to Gondar.

This year, the 9th of Yasous reign, there appeared a comet, remarkable
for its size and fiery brightness of its body, and for the prodigious
length and distinctness of its tail. It was first taken notice of
at Gondar, two days before the feast of St Michael, on which day the
army takes the field. A sight so uncommon alarmed all sorts of people;
and the prophets, who had kept themselves within very moderate bounds
during this whole reign, now thought that it was incumbent upon them
to distinguish themselves, and be silent no longer. Accordingly they
foretold, from this phenomenon, and published everywhere as a truth
infallibly and immutably pre-ordained, that the present campaign was
to exhibit a scene of carnage and bloodshed, more terrible and more
extensive than any thing that ever had appeared in the annals of
Ethiopia. That these torrents of blood, which were everywhere to follow
the footsteps of the king, were to be stopped by his death, which was
to happen before he ever returned again to Gondar; and, as the object
of the king’s expedition was still a secret, these alarming presages
gained a great deal of credit.

But it was not so with Yasous, who, notwithstanding he was importuned,
by learned men of all sorts, to put off his departure for some days,
absolutely refused, answering always such requests by irony and
derision: “Pho! Pho! says he, you are not in the right; we must give
the comet fair play; use him well, or he will never appear again, and
then idle people and old women will have nothing to amuse themselves
with.”

He accordingly left Gondar at the time he had appointed; and he was
already arrived at Amdaber, a few day’s distance from the capital,
when an express brought him word of his mother’s death, on which he
immediately marched back to Gondar, and buried her in the island of
Mitraha with all possible magnificence, and with every mark of sincere
grief.

Though the prophets had not just succeeded in what they foretold, they
kept nevertheless a good countenance. It is true that no blood was
shed, nor did the king die before he returned to Gondar; but his mother
died when he was away, and that was much the same thing, for they
contended that it was not a great mistake, from the bare authority of
a comet, to err only in the sex of the person that was to die; a queen
for a king was very near calculation. As for the bloody story, and the
king’s death, they said they had mistaken the year in computing, but
that it still was to happen (when it pleased God) _some other time_.

Every body agreed that these explanations were the best possible,
excepting the king, who perceived a degree of malice in the foretelling
his death and certain loss of his army just at the instant he was
taking the field. But he disguised his resentment under strong irony,
with which he attacked these diviners incessantly. He had inquired
accurately the day of his mother’s death: “How is it, says he to his
chaplain, (or kees hatzé) that this comet should come to _foretel_
my mother’s death, when she was dead four days before it appeared?”
Another day, to the same person he said, “I fear you do my mother
too much honour at the expence of religion. Is it decent to suppose
that such a star, the most remarkable appearance at the birth of
Christ, should now be employed on no greater errand than to foretel
the death of the daughter of Guebra Mascal?” These, and many more
such railleries, accounted by these visionaries, as little short of
impiety, so mortified Kostè (the kees hatzé,) a great believer in, and
protector of the dreamers, that he resigned all his employments, and
retired among the hermits into the desert of Werk-leva towards Sennaar,
to study the aspects of the stars more accurately, and more at leisure.

Though we neither pay this comet the superstitious reverence the idle
fanatics of Abyssinia shewed it, nor yet treat it with that contempt
which this great king’s good sense prompted him to do, we shall make
some use of it, acknowledging our gratitude to the historian who has
recorded it. We shall hereby endeavour to establish our chronology
in opposition to that of the catholic writers, relating to the date
of some transactions with which they were not cotemporaries, and
only relate from hearsay, as happening before the arrival of the
missionaries in this country.

Yasous the Great, of whom we are now writing, came to the throne upon
the death of his father Hannes in 1680; the 9th year of this reign then
was 1689.

Hedar is the 3d month of the Abyssinians, and answers to part of our
November; and the 12th of that month, Hedar, is the feast of St Michael
the archangel, or 8th day of our month November, N. S.

Gondar is in lat. 12° 34´ 30´´ N. and in long. 37° 33´ 0´´ E. from the
meridian of Greenwich. By the fiery appearance of the nucleus, or body
of the comet, it certainly then was very near the sun, and either was
going down upon it to its perihelion, or had already passed it, and
was receding to its aphelion; but by its increasing tail, already at
a great length, we may conjecture it was only then going down to its
conjunction, and was then near approaching to the sun.

From this we should conclude that this comet must have been seen,
however rapidly it did move, some time before the 6th of November,
or two days before the feast of St Michael. But this depends on the
circumstances of the climate; for though the tropical rains cease the
first of September, the cloudy weather continues all the month of
October; at the end of these fall the latter rains in gentle showers,
which allay the fevers in Dembea, and make the country wholesome for
the march of the army, and these rains fall mostly in the night. From
this it is probable that the comet, having at first little light and no
tail, as yet at a distance from the sun, was not very apparent to the
naked eye, till by its increased motion and heat it had acquired both
tail and brightness, as it approached its perihelion.

Now we find by our European accounts[63], that, in the year 1689, there
did appear a comet, the orbit of which was calculated by M. Pingrè. And
this comet arrived at its perihelion on the 1st day of December 1689,
so was going down much inflamed, and with a violent motion to the sun,
the 6th of November, when it was observed at Gondar, being but 25 days
then from its perihelion.

As these circumstances are more than sufficient to constitute the
identity of the comet, a phænomenon too rare to risk being confounded
with another, we may hardly conclude the 9th year of Yasous the First
to be the year 1689 of Christ, such as our chronology, drawn from the
Abyssinian annals, states it to be; or, at least, if there is any
error, it must be so small as to be of no sort of consequence to any
sort of readers, or influence upon the narrative of any transactions.

The 10th year began with a sudden and violent alarm, which spread
itself in an instant all over the kingdom without any certain
authority. The Galla with an innumerable army were said to have entered
Gojam, at several places, and laid waste the whole province, and this
was the more extraordinary, as the Nile was now in the height of its
inundation. On his march, the king learned that this story arose merely
from a panic; and this formidable army turned out no more than a small
band of robbers of that nation, who had passed the river in their usual
way, part on horseback, while the foot were dragged over, hanging at
the horses tails, or riding on goats skins blown up with wind. This
small party had surprised some weak villages, killed the inhabitants,
and immediately returned across the river. But the alarm continued,
and there were people at Gondar who were ready to swear they saw the
villages and churches on fire, and a large army of Galla in their march
to Ibaba, at the same time that there was not one Galla on the Gojam
side of the river.

The king, however, either considering this small body of Galla coming
at this unseasonable time, and the panic that was so artificially
spread, as a feint to throw him off his guard when a real invasion
might be intended, or with a view to cover his own designs, summoned
all the men of the province of Gojam to meet him in arms at Ibaba the
7th day of January, being the proper season for preparing an expedition
into the country of the Galla. He himself in the mean time retired to
Dek, an island in the lake Tzana, there to stay till his army should be
collected.

While the king was in the island, a number of the malcontents among the
monks, who had, in the several assemblies, been banished for sedition
with Tebedin, came to him there, desiring to be heard before an
assembly; and they brought with them Arca Denghel, of Debra Samayat, to
support their petition. The king answered, that he was ready to call an
assembly, provided the Abuna desired, or would promise to be present;
but that the Abuna was then at Debra Mariam, where they might go and
know his mind.

The Abuna, who foresaw little good could be expected from such
meetings, and knew how disagreeable they were to the king, absolutely
refused to attend. On this they returned again to the king, desiring
that, of his own mere prerogative, he would call their assembly without
consulting further the Abuna. To this the king answered boldly, That
he knew it was his right to call his subjects together, without any
other reason for so doing but his will; yet, when the avowed cause of
the meeting was to canvass matters of faith, he had made it a rule to
himself, that the Abuna should always be present, or at least consent
to the meeting. And with this answer he ordered them all to depart
immediately.

Many of the principal people about the king advised him to put these
turbulent people in irons, for daring to come into his presence without
leave. But Yasous was contented to remand each to the place of his
banishment from whence he came. He then removed from Dek to Ibaba, on
the 10th of January, the journey being no more than two easy days;
but, whether it was that the Galla did not intend another invasion, or
whether they were overawed by the king’s preparations and presence, and
did not think themselves safe even in their own country, none of them
this year passed the Nile, or gave any uneasiness either to Gojam or
Damot.

Though the whole nation believed that the king’s attention was entirely
engaged in the various expeditions against the Galla and Shangalla,
which he executed with so much diligence and success, yet there was
still a principal object superior to all these, which remained a secret
in his own breast, after the parties concerned had absolutely forgot
it. All his campaigns against the Shangalla were only designed to lull
asleep those he considered as his principal enemies, that he might make
the blow he aimed at them more certain and effectual.

Six years had now passed since the Agows, and particularly the most
powerful tribe of them, the Zeegam, had, with those of Damot and the
Galla, conspired to put the crown upon the head of the rebel prince
Isaac, who had lost his life in the engagement which followed on the
other side of the Nile. It will be remembered also, that the country
of the Agows is in general open, full of rich plains, abundantly
watered by variety of fine streams; in other parts, gentle risings
and descents, but without mountains, saving that, almost in every
tribe, Nature had placed one rugged mountain to which these people
retired upon the approach of their neighbouring enemies the Galla and
Shangalla. This description does, in a more extensive manner, belong to
the country of the Zeegam, the most powerful, rich, and trading tribe
of the whole nation.

Not one single mountain, but a considerable ridge, divides the country
nearly in the middle, the bottom of which, and nearly one-third up,
is covered with brush-wood, full of stiff bamboos and canes, bearing
prickly fruit, with aloes, acacia very thorny, and of several dwarf
shrubby kinds, interspersed with the kantuffa[64], a beautiful thorn,
which alone is considered, where it grows thick and in abundance, as
a sufficient impediment for the march of a royal army. Through these
are paths known only to the inhabitants themselves, which lead you to
the middle of the mountain, where are large caves, probably begun by
Nature, and afterwards enlarged by the industry of man. The mouths of
these are covered with bushes, canes, and wild oats, that grow so as to
conceal both man and horse, while the tops of these mountains are flat
and well-watered, and there they sow their grain out of the reach of
the enemy. Upon the first alarm they drive the cattle to the top, lodge
their wives and children in the caves, and, when the enemy approaches
near, they hide the cattle in the caves likewise, some of which
cavities are so large as to hold 500 oxen, and all the people to which
they belong. The men then go down to the lowest part of the mountain,
from whose thickets they sally, upon every opportunity that presents
itself, to attack the enemy whom they find marauding in the plains.

The king had often assembled his army at Ibaba, only four days march
from Zeegam. He had done more; he had passed below the country,
and returned by the other side of it, in his attack upon Geesa and
Wumbarea; but he had never committed any act of hostility, nor shewn
himself discontented with them. To deceive them still farther, he
ordered now his army to meet him at Esté in Begemder; and sent to
Kasmati Claudius, governor of Tigré, to join him with all his forces as
soon as he should hear he was arrived at Lama, a large plain before we
descend the steep mountain of Lamalmon, which stands not far from the
banks of the river Tacazzé. He privately gave orders also to Kasmati
Claudius, Kasmati Dimmo Christos of Tigré, and to Adera and Quaquera
Za Menfus Kedus, to inform themselves where the water lay below, and
whether there was enough for his army in Betcoom, for so they call the
territory of the eastern branch of Shangalla adjoining to Siré and
Tigré. By this manœuvre the enemy was deceived, as the most intelligent
thought he was to attack Lasta, and the others, that knew the secret of
the water, were sure his march was against the Shangalla.

The king began his march from Ibaba, and crossed the Nile at the second
cataract below Dara, where there is a bridge; and, entering Begemder,
he joined his army at Esté, which was going in a route directly from
Agow and Damot towards Lasta. But no sooner was he arrived at Esté,
than, that very night, he suddenly turned back the way he came, and,
marching through Maitsha, he crossed the Nile, for the second time, at
Goutto, above the first cataract.

The morning of the 3d of May, the sixth day of forced marches, without
having encamped the whole way, he entered Zeegam at the head of his
army. He found the country in perfect security, both people and
cattle below on the plains and in the villages; and having put all
to the sword who first offered themselves, and the principal of the
conspirators being taken prisoners, he sold their wives and children
at a public auction for slaves to the highest bidder. He then took the
principal men among them along with him for security for paying six
years tribute which they were in arrears, fined them 6000 oxen, which
he ordered to be delivered upon the spot; and then collecting his army,
he sent to the chiefs of Damot to meet him before he entered their
territory, and to bring security with them for the fine he intended to
lay upon them, otherwise he would destroy their country with fire and
sword; and he advanced the same day to Assoa, south of the sources of
the Nile, divided only from Damot by the ridge of mountains of Amid
Amid.

The people of Damot, inhabiting an open level country without defence,
had no choice but to throw themselves on the king’s mercy, who fined
them 500 ounces of gold and 100 oxen, and took the principal people
with him in irons as hostages.

He then returned, leaving the sources of the Nile on his right, through
Dengui, Fagitta, and Aroosi; crossed the river Kelti, having the Agow
and Atchesser on his left, and returned to Gondar by Dingleber. He
then gave 2000 cattle to the churches of Tecla Haimanout and Yasous,
being neared the king’s palace, to the Itchegué Hannes, the judges and
principal servants of his household, to all a share, without reserving
one to himself. And the rains being now very constant, (for it was the
25th of June) he resolved to continue the rest of the winter in Gondar
to regulate the affairs of the church.

This year the king resumed his expedition against the Shangalla,
towards which he had taken several preparatory steps, while he was
projecting the surprise of the Zeegam. These are the Troglodytes on
the eastern part of Abyssinia, towards the Red Sea, south of Walkayt,
Siré, Tigré, and Baharnagash, till they are there cut off by the
mountains of the Habab. These, the most powerful of all their tribes,
are comprehended under the general name of _Dobenah_; the tribe Baasa,
which we have already spoken of as occupying the banks of the Tacazzé,
are the only partners they have in the peninsula formed by that river
and the Mareb. Their country and manner of life have been already
abundantly described. It is all called Kolla, in opposition to Daga,
which is the general name of the mountainous parts of Abyssinia.

The king, being informed by Kasmati Claudius that there was water in
great plenty at Betcoom, marched from Gondar the 29th of October to
Deba, thence to Kossoguè, after to Tamama. He then turned to the left
to a village called Sidrè, nearer to the Shangalla. From this station
he forbade the lighting fires in the camp, and took the road leading to
the Mareb; then turning to the left, the 1st of December he surprised a
village called Kunya. The king was the first who began the attack, and
was in great danger, as Mazmur, captain of his guard, was killed by a
lance at his side. But the soldiers rushing in upon sight of the king’s
situation, who had already slain two with his own hand, the village was
carried, and the inhabitants put to the sword, refusing all to fly, and
fighting obstinately to the last gasp.

From Kunya the king proceeded rapidly to Tzaada Amba[65], the largest
and most powerful settlement of these savages. They have no water
but what they get from the river Mareb, which, as I have elsewhere
observed, rises above Dobarwa, and, after making the circle of that
town, loses itself soon after in the sand for a space, then appears
again, and, after a short course, hides itself a second time to the N.
E. near the Taka, whose wells it supplies with fresh water. But in the
rainy months it runs with a full-stream, in a wide and deep bed, and
unites itself to the Tacazzé, with it making the northmost point of the
ancient island of Meroë.

The king met the same success at Tzaada Amba that he had before
experienced at Kunya, at which last village he passed the feast of the
epiphany and benediction of the waters; a ceremony annually observed
both by the Greek and Abyssinian church, the intent of which has been
strangely mistaken by foreigners.

From Kunya, his head-quarters, Yasous attacked the several nations
of which this is, as it were, the capital, Zacoba, Fadè, Qualquou,
and Sahalé, and he returned again to Tzaada Amba, resolving to
complete their destruction. The remains of these miserable people,
finding resistance vain, had hid themselves in inaccessible caves in
the mountains, and the thickest parts of the woods, where they lay
perfectly concealed in the day-time, and only stole out when thirst
obliged them at night. The king, who knew this, and that they had no
other water but what they brought from the Mareb, formed a strong line
of troops along the banks of that river, till the greatest part of the
Shangalla of Tzaada Amba died with thirst, or were taken or slain by
the army.

His next enterprize was to attempt Betcoom, a large habitation of
Shangalla east of the Mareb, whose number, strength, and reputation for
courage, had hitherto prevented the Abyssinians from molesting them,
never having touched, unless the farthest skirts of their country. The
names of their tribes inhabiting Betcoom are, Baigada, Dadé, Ketfè,
Kicklada, Moleraga, Megaerbé, Gana, Selé, Hamta, Shalada, Elmsi, and
Lentè. The small river of Lidda falling from a high precipice, when
swelled with the winter rains, hollows out deep and large reservoirs
below, which it leaves full of water when the rains cease, so that
these people are here as well supplied with water as those that dwell
on the large rivers the Mareb and Tacazzé. This was a circumstance
unknown, till this sagacious and provident king ordered the place to
be reconnoitred by Kasmati Claudius, then marched and encamped on the
river Lidda, which, after a short but violent course, falls into the
Mareb.

The Shangalla of Betcoom did nothing worthy of their reputation or
numbers. They had already procured intelligence of the fate of great
part of their nation, and had dispersed themselves in unknown and
desolate places. The king, however, made a considerable number of
slaves of the younger sort, and killed as many of the rest as fell into
his hands.

Leaving Betcoom, the army proceeded still eastward; passed through the
mountains of the Habab, into the low level country which runs parallel
to the Red Sea, at the base of these mountains, where he spent several
days hunting the elephant, some of which he slew with his own hand, and
turned then to the left to Amba Tchou[66] and Taka.

The Taka are a nation of Shepherds living near the extremity of the
rains. They are not Arabs, but live in villages, and were part formerly
of the Bagla, or Habab; they speak the language of Tigré, and are now
reputed part of the kingdom of Sennaar.

While the king was at Taka, he received the disagreeable news, that,
after he had left the Shangalla on the Mareb, Mustapha Gibberti, a
Mahometan soldier in the service of Kasmati Fasa Christos of Dedgin,
had, with a small number of men, ventured down, thinking that he should
surprise the Shangalla of Tzaada Amba, before they recovered from
their late misfortune. This Mustapha had slain two or three Shangalla
with fire-arms; and at first they stood aloof as fearing the king. But
finding soon that it was no part of his army, and only a small body
of adventurers, the Shangalla ‘now collected in numbers, surrounded
Mustapha and his party, whom they cut off to a man; and, pursuing their
advantage, they entered and took Dedgin, wounded Kasmati Fasa Christos,
and put the inhabitants of the town to the sword’.

News of this misfortune were carried speedily to Kasmati Claudius,
governor of Tigré: Cassem, a Mahometan, led the Gibbertis, the people
of that religion in the province; and, as he was an advanced party,
came speedily to blows with the Shangalla, and was closely engaged,
with great appearance of success, when Claudius came up with an army
that would soon have put an end to the contest. But no sooner was
his army engaged with the Shangalla, than a panic seized him, and he
sounded a retreat; which, in an instant, became a most shameful flight.
Cassem and his gibbertis fell, fighting to the last man in the middle
of their enemies. The Shangalla followed their advantage, and great
part of the Abyssinian army perished in the flight; Claudius, tho’ he
escaped, left his standard, kettle-drums, and his whole province in
possession of the enemy.

The king, upon hearing this, returned hastily into Siré; and his
presence established order and tranquillity in that province, already
half abandoned for fear of the Shangalla. From Siré the king proceeded
to Axum, where he celebrated his victories over the Shangalla, by
several days of feasting and thanksgiving.

In the midst of this rejoicing, news were brought that Murat, a servant
of the king, whom he had dispatched to India with merchandise, to
bring such commissions as he stood in need of, was arrived at Masuah,
where Musa the Naybe, or Turkish governor of the island, had detained
him, and seized his goods, under some vexatious pretences. There is
not indeed a more merciless, thievish set of miscreants, than in that
government of Masuah. But the king knew too well the few resources that
island had, to be long in applying a remedy, without moving from Axum;
after being fully informed of the affair, in all its circumstances,
by Murat, he sent to Abba Saluce, Guebra Christos, and Zarabrook of
Hamazen, the governors of the districts, that as it were surround
Masuah, prohibiting all, upon pain of death, to suffer any provisions
to be carried by any person whatever into the island of Masuah.

A severe famine instantly followed, which was to terminate in certain
death, before any relief could come to them, unless from Abyssinia.
The Naybe Musa, therefore, found into what a terrible scrape he had
got; but hunger did not leave him a moment to deliberate. No third
way remained, but either he must see the king, or die; and without
hesitation he chose the former. He, therefore, set out for Axum,
bringing with him Murat and all the merchandises he had seized, as also
several very considerable presents for Yasous himself, who accepted
them, received his submission, and ordered the communication with
Abyssinia to be open as before. This done, he dismissed the Naybe, who
returned to Masuah in peace.

The next affair that came before the king was that of Kasmati Claudius,
(governor of Tigré) who was accused and found guilty of having fled
while the battle with the Shangalla was yet undecided, leaving his
standard and kettle-drums in the power of the enemy. Besides his
present misbehaviour, strong prejudice existed against him, drawn from
his former character; for it was averred, from very credible authority,
that on one occasion, upon a very slender appearance of sedition,
he ordered his troops to fire upon several priests of Axum, some of
whom were killed on the spot. Besides which, in the reign of Hatzè
Hannes, he was found guilty of capital crimes committed at Emfras,
condemned to die, and was already hanging upon the tree, when a very
seasonable reprieve arrived from the king, and he was thereupon cut
down whilst yet alive. Yasous contented himself with depriving him of
his employment, and afterwards sending him to perpetual banishment.

The next brought to their trial were Za Woldo, and Adera and his sons.
These last were very near relations to the king, for they were sons of
Ozoro Keduset Christos, daughter of Facilidas. They were accused of
having deserted their country and left it waste to be over-run by wild
beasts, and a rendezvous for the Shangalla, who thence extended their
incursions as far as Waldubba. Of this there was ample proof against
them, and they were therefore sentenced to die, but the king commuted
their punishment into that of being imprisoned for life in a cave in
the island of Dek.

As for the province of Siré itself, he declared all the inhabitants and
nobility, degraded from their rank, and all lands, whether feus from
the king, or held by any other tenure, were confiscated, resumed by,
and re-united to the crown. He then reduced the whole province from a
royal government to a private one, and annexed it to the province of
Tigré, whose governor was to place over it a shum, or petty officer,
without any ensigns of power. And, last of all, he gave the government
of Tigré to the Ras Feres, or master of the horse, in room of Kasmati
Claudius degraded and banished.

The many striking examples which the king had lately given, one close
upon the other, of his own personal bravery, his impartial justice, his
secrecy in his expeditions, and the certain vengeance that followed
where it was deserved, his punishment of the Zeegam, his expedition
against the Shangalla, his affair with the Naybe Musa, and his
behaviour to the cowardly Claudius and dastardly nobility of Siré,
fully convinced his subjects of all degrees, that neither family, nor
being related to the crown, nor the strength of their country, nor
length of time since they offended, nor indeed any thing but a return
to and continuance in their duty, could give them security under such
a prince. Thus ended the campaign of the Dobenah, spoke of to this
day in Abyssinia as the greatest warlike atchievement of any of their
kings. Twenty-six thousand men are said to have perished by thirst
when the king took possession of the water at Tzaada Amba. And yet,
notwithstanding the small-pox which, in some places, exterminated
whole tribes, the Dobenah have not lost an inch of territory, but seem
rather to be gaining upon Siré.

Yasous arrived at Dancaz on the 8th of March 1692, having dismissed his
army as he passed Gondar. From Dancaz he went to Lasta, and after a
short stay there, came to Arringo in Begemder. At this place the king
received accounts that far exceeded his expectations, and gratified his
warmest wishes. He had long endeavoured to gain a party among the Galla
to divide them; and, though no marks of success had yet followed, he
still had continued to use his endeavours.

On his arrival at Arringo, he was met by a chief of the southern
Galla, called Kal-kend, who brought him advice that, while he was
busy with the Shangalla, an irruption had been made into Amhara by
the Galla tribes of Liban and Toluma; that they, the king’s friends,
had come up with them at Halka, fought with them, and beat them, and
freed Amhara entirely from all apprehension. The king, exceedingly
rejoiced to see his most inveterate enemies become the defenders of his
country, ordered the governor of Amhara to pay the Kal-kend 500 webs
of cotton-cloth, 500 loads of corn, and escort both the men and the
present till they were safely delivered in their own country.

The 30th of June the king arrived at Gondar from Arringo, and
immediately summoned an assembly of the clergy to meet and receive
a letter from the patriarch of Alexandria, brought by Abba Masmur
of Agde, and Abba Dioscuros of Maguena, who were formerly sent to
Egypt to ask the patriarch why he displaced Abuna Christodulus, and
appointed Abba Sanuda in his room, and desiring that Abba Marcus should
be made Abuna, and Sanuda deposed. The clergy met very punctually, and
the patriarch’s letter was produced in the assembly, the seal examined,
and declared to be the patriarch’s, and unbroken. The letter being
opened by the king’s order, it contained the patriarch’s mandate to
depose Abba Sanuda, and to put Marcus Abuna in his place, which was
immediately done by command of the king.

While Yasous was thus busied in directing the affairs of his kingdom
with great wisdom and success, both in church and state, a matter was
in agitation, unknown to him, at a distance from his dominions, which
had a tendency to throw them again into confusion.

Towards the end of the last century, there was settled at Cairo a
number of Italian missionaries of the reformed Order of St Francis,
who, though they lived in the same convent, and were maintained at the
expence of the fathers of the Holy Land, yet did they still pretend
to be independent of the guardian of Jerusalem, the superior of these
latter.

The expence of their maintenance, joined with their pretensions to
independence, gave great offence to those religious of the Holy Land,
who thereupon carried their complaints to Rome, offering to be at the
whole charge of the mission of Egypt, and to furnish from their own
society subjects capable of attending to, and extending the Christian
faith. This offer met with the desired success at Rome. The mission of
Egypt, to the exclusion of every other Order, was given to the fathers
of Jerusalem, or the Holy Land, whom we shall henceforth call Capuchin
friars. These capuchins lost no time, but immediately dismissed the
reformed Franciscans, whom we shall hereafter distinguish by the name
of Franciscans, suffering only two of that Order to remain at Cairo.

The Franciscans, thus banished, returned all to Rome, and there, for
several years together, openly defended their own cause, insisting upon
the justice of their being replaced in the exercise of their ancient
functions. This, however, they found absolutely impossible. They were a
poor Order, and the interest of the capuchins had stopped every avenue
of the sacred college against them. Finding, therefore, that fair and
direct means could not accomplish their ends, they had recourse to
others not so commendable, and by these they succeeded, and obtained
their purpose. They pretended that, when the Jesuits were chased out of
Abyssinia, a great number of Catholics, avoiding the persecution, had
fled into the neighbouring countries of Sennaar and Nubia; that they
still remained, most meritoriously preserving their faith amidst the
very great hardships inflicted upon them by the infidels; but that,
under these hardships, they must soon turn Mahometans, unless spiritual
assistance was speedily sent them.

This representation, as totally void of truth as ever fable was, was
confirmed by the two Franciscans, who still remained at Cairo by
permission of the capuchins, or fathers of the Holy Land; and, when
afterwards published at Rome, it excited the zeal of every bigot
in Italy. All interested themselves in behalf of these imaginary
Christians of Nubia; and pope Innocent XII. was so convinced of the
truth of the story, as to establish a considerable fund to support the
expence of this, now called the Ethiopic mission, the sole conduct of
which remains still with the reformed Franciscans.

To take care of these fugitive Christians of Nubia, though it was the
principal, yet it was not the only charge committed to the fathers of
his mission. They were to penetrate into Abyssinia, and keep the seeds
of the Romish faith alive there until a proper time should present
itself for converting the whole kingdom.

In order to this, a large convent was bought for them at Achmim, the
ancient Panopolis in Upper Egypt, that here they might be able to
afford a refreshment to such of their brethren as should return weary
and exhausted by their preaching among the Nubian confessors; and, for
further assistance, they had permission to settle two of their Order at
Cairo, independent of the fathers of the Holy Land, notwithstanding the
former exclusion.

Such is the state of this mission at the present time. No Nubian
Christians ever existed at the time of their establishment, nor is
there one in being at this day. But if their proselytes have not
increased, their convents have. Achmim, Furshout, Badjoura, and Negadè
are all religious houses belonging to this mission, although I never
yet was able to learn, that either Heretic, or Pagan, or Mahometan,
was so converted as to die in the Christian faith at any one of these
places; nor have they been much troubled with relieving their brethren,
worn out with the toils of Abyssinian journies, none of them, as far
as I know, having ever made one step towards that country; nor is this
indeed to be regretted by the republic of letters, because, besides
a poor stock of scholastic divinity, not one of them that I saw had
either learning or abilities to be of the smallest use either in
religion or discovery.

It was now the most brilliant period of the reign of Louis XIV. almost
an Augustan age, and generally allowed so, both in France and among
foreigners. Men of merit, of all countries and professions, felt
the effects of the liberality of this great encourager of learning;
public works were undertaken, and executed superior to the boasted
ones of Greece or Rome, and a great number and variety of noble events
constituted a magnificent history of his reign, in a series of medals.
Religion alone had yet afforded no hint for these. His conduct in this
matter, instead of that of a hero, shewed him to be a blind, bloody,
merciless tyrant, madly throwing down in a moment, with one hand, what
he had, with the assistance of great ministers, been an age in building
with the other. The Jesuits, zealous for the honour of the king, their
great protector, thought this a time to step in and wipe away the
stain. With this view they set upon forwarding a scheme, which might
have furnished a medal superior to all the rest, had its inscription
been, “The Kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts.”

Father Fleuriau, a friend of father de la Chaise, the king’s confessor,
was employed to direct the consul of Cairo, that he should, in
co-operation with the Jesuits privately, send a fit person into
Abyssinia, who might inspire the king of that country with a desire
of sending an embassy into France, and, upon the management of this
political affair, they founded their hopes of getting themselves
replaced in the mission they formerly enjoyed, and of again superseding
their rivals the Franciscans, in directing all the measures to be taken
for that country’s conversion. But this required the utmost delicacy,
for it was well known, that the court of Rome was very much indisposed
towards them, imputing to their haughtiness, implacability, and
imprudence, the loss of Abyssinia. Their conduct in China, where they
tolerated idolatrous rites to be blended with Christian worship, began
also now to be known, and to give the greatest scandal to the whole
church. It was, therefore, necessary to make the king declare first in
their favour before they began to attempt to conciliate the pope.

Louis took upon him the protection of this mission with all the
readiness the Jesuits desired; and the Jesuit Verseau was sent
immediately to Rome, with strong letters to cardinal Jansen, protector
of France, who introduced him to the pope.

Verseau knew well the consequence of the protection with which he was
honoured. At his first audience he declared, in a very firm voice and
manner, to the pope, that the king had resolved to take upon himself
the conduct of the Ethiopic mission, and that he had cast his eyes upon
them (the Jesuits) as the fittest persons to be entrusted with the
care of it, for _reasons best known to himself_. The pope dissembled;
he extolled, in the most magnificent terms, the king’s great zeal for
the advancement of religion, approved of the choice he had made of the
Jesuits, and praised their resolution as highly acceptable to him,
immediately consenting that Verseau, and five other Jesuits, should
without delay pass into Abyssinia.

But it very soon appeared, that, however this might be the language
of the pope, nothing could be more remote from his intentions; for,
without the knowledge of the Jesuits, or any way consulting them, he
appointed the superior of the Franciscans to be his legate a latere to
the king of Abyssinia, and provided him with presents to that prince,
and the chief noblemen of his court.

Some time afterwards, when, to prevent strife or concurrence, the
Jesuits applied to the pope to receive his directions which of the two
should first attempt to enter Abyssinia, the Franciscans, or their own
Order, the pope answered shortly, That it should be those who were most
expert. Whether this apparent indisposition of his Holiness intimidated
Verseau is not known; but, instead of going to Cairo, he went to
Constantinople, thence to Syria, to a convent of his Order of which
he was superior, and there he staid. So that the Ethiopic mission at
Cairo remained in the hands of two persons of different Orders, the one
Paschal, an Italian Franciscan friar, the other a Jesuit and Frenchman,
whose name was Brevedent.

Brevedent was a person of the most distinguished piety and probity,
zealous in promoting his religion, but neither imprudent nor rash in
his demonstrations of it; affable in his carriage, chearful in his
disposition, of the most profound humility and exemplary patience.
Besides this, he was reputed a man of good taste and knowledge in
profane learning, and, what crowned all, an excellent mathematician.
He seems indeed to me to have been a copy of the famous Peter Paez, who
first gave an appearance of stability to the Portuguese conversion of
Abyssinia; like him he was a Jesuit, but of a better nation, and born
in a better age.

I must here likewise take notice of what I have already hinted, that
in Abyssinia the character of ambassador is not known. They have no
treaties of peace or commerce with any nation in the world: But, for
purposes already mentioned, factors are employed; and, Abyssinia
being everywhere surrounded by Mahometans, these of course have the
preference; and, as they carry letters from their masters, the custom
of the East obliges them to accompany these with presents to the
sovereigns of the respective kingdoms through which they pass, and
this circumstance dignifies them with the title of ambassador in the
several courts at which they have business. Such was Musa, a factor of
the king, whom we have seen detained, and afterwards delivered by the
Naybe of Masuah, not many years before, in this king’s reign; and such
also was Hagi Ali, then upon his master’s business at Cairo, when M. de
Maillet was consul there, and had received his instructions from father
Fleuriau at Paris, to bring about this embassy from Abyssinia.

Besides his other business, Hagi Ali had orders to bring with him a
physician, if possible, from Cairo; for Yasous and his eldest son were
both of a scorbutic habit, which threatened to turn into a leprosy.
Hagi Ali, in former voyages, had been acquainted with a capuchin friar
Paschal; and, having received medicines from him before, he now applied
to Paschal to return with him into Abyssinia, and undertake the cure
of the king. Paschal very readily complied with this, upon condition
that he should be allowed to take for his companion a monk of his own
Order, friar Anthony; to which Hagi Ali readily consented, happy in
being enabled to carry two physicians to his master instead of one.

The French consul was soon informed of this treaty with the friar
Paschal; and, having very easy means to bring Hagi Ali to his house,
he informed him, that neither Paschal nor Anthony were physicians, but
that he himself had a man of his own nation, whose merit he extolled
beyond any thing that had hitherto been said of Hippocrates or Galen.
Hagi Ali very willingly accepted of the condition, and it was agreed
that, as Verseau had not appeared, Brevedent above mentioned should
attend the physician as his servant.

This physician was Charles Poncet, a Frenchman, settled in Cairo, who
was (as Mr Maillet says) bred a chymist and apothecary, and, if so,
was necessarily better skilled in the effects and nature of medicine
than those are who call themselves physicians, and practise in the
east. Nothing against his private character was intimated by the
consul at this time; and, with all deference to better judgment, I
must still think, that if Poncet did deserve the epithets of drunkard,
liar, babbler, and thief, which Maillet abundantly bestows upon him
towards the end of this adventure, the consul could not have chosen a
more improper person as the representative of his master, nor a more
probable one to make the design he had in hand miscarry; nor could he,
in this case, ever vindicate the preventing Paschal’s journey, who must
have been much fitter for all the employments intended than such a man
as Poncet was, if one half is true of that which the consul said of him
afterwards.

Maillet, having so far succeeded, prevailed upon one Ibrahim Hanna,
a Syrian, to write five letters, according to his own ideas, in the
Arabic language, one of which was to the king, the four others to
the principal officers at the court of Abyssinia: doubting, however,
whether Ibrahim’s expressions were equal to the sublimity of his
sentiments, he directed him to submit the letters to the consideration
of one Francis, a monk, capuchin, or friar of the Holy Land. Ibrahim
knew not this capuchin; but he was intimate with another Francis of the
reformed Franciscan Order, and to him by mistake he carried the letters.

These Franciscans were the very men from whom Mr de Maillet would have
wished to conceal the sending Poncet with the Jesuit Brevedent; but
the secret being now revealed, Ibrahim Hanna was discharged the French
service for this mistake; and Hagi Ali departing immediately after with
Poncet and Brevedent, no time remained for the Franciscans to take the
steps they afterwards did to bring about the tragedy in the person of
Poncet, which they completely effected in that of Mr Noir du Roule.

Mr Poncet, furnished with a chest of medicines at the expence of the
factory, accompanied by father Brevedent, who, in quality of his
servant, now took the name of Joseph, joined Hagi Ali, and the caravan
destined in the first place, to Sennaar the capital of Nubia.

Poncet set out from Cairo on the 10th of June of the year 1698, and,
fifteen days after, they came to Monfalout, a considerable town upon
the banks of the Nile, the rendezvous of the caravan being at Ibnah,
half a league above Monfalout. Here they tarried for above three
months, waiting the coming of the merchants from the neighbouring towns.

In the afternoon of the 24th of September, they advanced above a league
and a half distance, and took up their lodging at Elcantara, or the
bridge, on the eastern bank of the Nile. A large calish, or cut, from
the Nile stretches here to the east, and, at that season, was full of
water, the inundation being at its height.

Poncet believes he was on the eastern banks of the Nile; but this is a
mistake. Siout and Monfalout, the cities he speaks of, are both on the
western banks of that river; nor had the caravan any thing to do with
the eastern banks, when their course was for many days to the west, and
to the southward of west. Nor was the bridge he passed a bridge over
the Nile. There are no bridges upon that river from the Mediterranean
till we arrive at the second cataract near the lake Tzana in Abyssinia.
The amphitheatre and ruins he speaks of are the remains of the ancient
city Isiu; and what he took for the Nile was a calish from the river to
supply that city with water.

The 2d of October the caravan set out in earnest, and passed, as he
says, into a frightful desert of sand, having first gone through a
narrow passage, which he does not mention, amidst those barren, bare,
and stony mountains which border the valley of Egypt on the west.

The 6th of October they came to El-Vah, a large village, or town,
thick-planted with palm-trees, the Oasis Parva of the ancients, the
last inhabited place to the west that is under the jurisdiction of
Egypt. By softening the original name, Poncet calls this Helaoue,
which, as he says, signifies _sweetness_. But surely this was never
given it from the productions he mentions to abound there, _viz._ senna
and coloquintida. The Arabs call El-Vah a shrub or tree, not unlike
our hawthorn either in form or flower. It was of this wood, they say,
Moses’s rod was made when he sweetened the waters of Marah. With a
rod of this wood, too, Khalid Ibn el Waalid, the great destroyer of
Christians, sweetened these waters at El-Vah, once very bitter, and
gave it the name from this miracle. A number of very fine springs burst
from the earth at El-Vah, which renders this small spot verdant and
beautiful, though surrounded with dreary deserts on every quarter; it
is situated like an island in the midst of the ocean.

The caravan rested four days at El-Vah to procure water and provisions
for the continuation of the journey thro’ the desert. Poncet’s
description of the unpleasantness of this, is perfectly exact, and
without exaggeration. In two days they came to Cheb, where there
is water, but strongly impregnated with alum, as the name itself
signifies; and, three days after, they reached Selima, where they found
the water good, rising from an excellent spring, which gives its name
to a large desert extending westward forty-five days journey to Dar
Fowr, Dar Selè, and Bagirma, three small principalities of Negroes
that live within the reach of the tropical rains.

At Selima they provided water for five days; and, on the 26th of
October, having turned their course a little to the eastward, came to
Moscho, or Machou, a large village on the western banks of the Nile,
which Poncet still mistakes for the eastern, and which is the only
inhabited place since the leaving El-Vah, and the frontiers of the
kingdom of Dongola, dependent upon that of Sennaar. The Nile here takes
the farthest turn to the westward, and is rightly delineated in the
French maps.

Poncet very rightly says, this is the beginning of the country of the
Barabra, or Berberians, (I suppose it is a mistake of the printer
when called in the narrative Barauras). The true signification of the
term is _the land of the Shepherds_, a name more common and better
known in the first dynasties of Egypt than in more modern histories.
The Erbab (or governor) of this province received him hospitably, and
kindly invited him to Argos, his place of residence, on the eastern or
opposite side of the Nile, and entertained him there, upon hearing from
Poncet that he was sent for by the king of Abyssinia.

After refreshing themselves eight days at Moscho, they left it on the
4th of November 1698, and arrived at Dongola on the 13th of the same
month. The country which he passed along the Nile is very pleasant, and
is described by him very properly. It does not owe its fertility to the
overflowing of the Nile, the banks of that river being considerably too
high. It is watered, however, by the industry of the inhabitants, who,
by different machines, raise water from the stream.

We are not to attribute to Poncet, but to those who published, the
story here put into father Brevedent’s mouth about the fugitive
Christians in Nubia, which fable gave rise to the first institution of
the Ethiopic mission. “It drew tears, says he, from the eyes of father
Brevedent, my dear companion, when he reflected that it was not long
since this was a Christian country; and that it had not lost the faith
but only for want of some person who had zeal enough to consecrate
himself to the instruction of this abandoned nation.” He adds, that
upon their way they found a great number of hermitages and churches
half ruined; a fiction derived from the same source.

Dongola was taken, and apostatized early, and the stones of hermitages
and churches had long before this been carried off, and applied to the
building of mosques. Father Brevedent, therefore, if he wept for any
society of Christians at Dongola, must have wept for those that had
perished there 500 years before.

Poncet was much caressed at Dongola for the cures he made there. The
Mek, or king, of that city wished him much to stay and settle there;
but desisted out of respect, when he heard he was going to the emperor
of Ethiopia. Dongola, Poncet has placed rightly on the eastern bank of
the Nile, about lat. 20° 22´.

The caravan departed from Dongola on the 6th of January 1699; four days
after which they entered into the kingdom of Sennaar, where they met
Erbab Ibrahim, brother of the prime minister, and were received civilly
by him. He defrayed their expences also as far as Korti, where they
arrived the 13th of January.

Our travellers from Korti were obliged to enter the great desert of
Bahiouda, and cross it in a S. E. direction till they came to Derreira,
where they rested two days, which, Poncet says, was done to avoid the
Arabs upon the Nile. These Arabs are called Chaigie; they inhabit the
banks of that river to the N. E. of Korti, and never pay the king his
revenue without being compelled and very ill-treated.

The country about Derreira is called Belled Ullah, from the cause of
its plenty rather than the plenty itself. This small district is upon
the very edge of the tropical rains, which it enjoys in part; and, by
that, is more fruitful than those countries which are watered only by
the industry of man. The Arabs of these deserts figuratively call rain
Rahamet Ullah, ‘the mercy of God’, and Belled Ullah, ‘the country which
enjoys that mercy.’

Some days after the caravan came to Gerri. Poncet says, the use of this
station was to examine caravans coming from the northward, whether they
had the small-pox or not. This usage is now discontinued by the decay
of trade. It must always have served little purpose, as the infection
oftener comes in merchandise than by passengers. At Gerri great respect
was shewn to Poncet, as going to Ethiopia.

I cannot conceive why Poncet says, that, to avoid the great windings
of the Nile, he should have been obliged to travel to the north-east.
This would have plainly carried him back to the desert of Bahiouda, and
the Arabs: his course must have been S. W. to avoid the windings of the
Nile, because he came to Herbagi, which he describes very properly as a
delicious situation. The next day they came to Sennaar.

The reader, I hope, will easily perceive that my intention is not
to criticise Mr Poncet’s journey. That has been done already so
illiberally and unjustly that it has nearly brought it into disrepute
and oblivion. My intention is to illustrate it; to examine the facts,
the places, and distances it contains; to correct the mistakes where it
has any, and restore it to the place it ought to hold in geography and
discovery. It was the first intelligible itinerary made through these
deserts; and I conceive it will be long before we have another; at any
rate, to restore and establish the old one will, in all sensible minds,
be the next thing to having made a second experiment.

He surely is in some degree of mistake about the situation of Sennaar
when he says it is upon an eminence. It is on a plain close on the
western banks of the Nile. A small error, too, has been made about its
latitude. By an observation said to have been made by father Brevedent,
the 21st of March 1699, he found the latitude of Sennaar to be 13° 4´
north. The French maps, the most correct we have in all that regards
the east, place this capital of Nubia in lat. 15° and a few minutes.
But the public may rest assured, that the correct latitude of Sennaar,
by a mean of very small differences of near fifty observations, made
with a three-feet brass quadrant, in the course of several months I
staid in that town, is lat 13° 34´ 36´´ north.

What I have to say further concerning Sennaar will come more naturally
in my own travels; and I shall only so far consider the rest of
Poncet’s route, as to explain and clear it from mistakes, Sennaar being
the only point in which our two tracts unite.

I shall beg the reader to remark, that, from the time of Poncet’s
setting out of Egypt till his arrival at Sennaar, so far was he from
being ill-looked upon, or any bad construction being put upon his
errand, that he was, on the contrary, respected everywhere, as going to
the king of Abyssinia. It never was then imagined he was to dry up the
Nile, nor that he was a conjurer to change its course, nor that he was
to teach the Abyssinians to cast cannon and make war, nor that he was
loaded with immense sums of money. These were all _piæ fraudes_, lies
invented by the priests and friars to incite these ignorant barbarians
to a crime which, though it passed unrevenged, will justly make these
brethren in iniquity the detestation of men of every religion in all
ages.

Poncet left Sennaar the 12th of May 1699, and crossed the Nile at
Basboch, about four miles above the town, where he stopped for three
days. This he calls a fair village; but it is a very miserable one,
consisting of scarce 100 huts, built of mud and reeds.

He departed the 15th in the evening, and travelled all the night as
far as Bacras, and arrived the day after at Abec; then at Baha, a long
day’s journey of about ten hours. He is mistaken, however, when he says
Baha is situated upon the banks of the Nile, for it is upon a small
river that runs into it. But, at the season he passed it, most of those
rivers were dried up.

On the 19th he came to Dodar, a place as inconsiderable as Baha; then
to Abra, a large village; then to Debarke and Enbulbul. On the 25th
they came to Giesim. Giesim is a large village situated upon the banks
of the Nile, in the middle of a forest of trees of a prodigious height
and size, all of which are loaded with fruit or flowers, and crowded
with paroquets, and variety of other birds, of a thousand different
colours. They made a long stay at this place, not less than nineteen
days.

In this interval, father Brevedent is said to have made an observation
of the latitude of the place, which, if admitted, would throw all the
geography of this journey into confusion. Poncet says, that Giesim
is half-way between Sennaar and the frontiers of Ethiopia, and that
a small brook, a little beyond Serké, is the boundary between those
states. Now, from Sennaar to Giesim are nine stages, and one of them we
may call a double one, but between Giesim and Serkè, only four; Giesim
then cannot be half way between Sennaar and Serkè.--Again, the latitude
of Sennaar is 13° 4´ north, according to Brevedent, or rather 13°
34´. Now, if the latitude of Giesim be 10°, then the distance between
Sennaar and it must be about 250 miles which they had travelled in
eight days, or more than thirty miles a-day, which, in that country, is
absolutely impossible.

But what must make this evident is, that we know certainly that Gondar,
the metropolis to which they were then going, is in lat. 12° 34´ north.
Giesim then would be south of Gondar, and the caravan must have passed
it when the observation was made. But they were not yet arrived at the
confines of Sennaar, much less to the capital of Abyssinia, to which
they were indeed advancing, but were still far to the northward of it.
There is a mistake then in this observation which is very pardonable,
Brevedent being then ill of a mortal dysentery, which terminated in
death soon after. We shall, therefore, correct this error, making the
latitude of Giesim 14° 12´ north, about 110 English miles from Sennaar,
and 203 from Gondar.

The 11th of June they set out from Giesim for Deleb, then to Chow, and
next to Abotkna. They rested all night, the 14th, in the delightful
valley of Sonnone, and, two days after, they came to Serkè, a large
town of trade, where there are many cotton weavers. Here ends the
kingdom of Sennaar, the brook without this town being the boundary of
the two states.

Arrived now in Abyssinia, they halted at Tambisso, a village which
belongs to the Abuna; next at Abiad, a village upon the mountain. On
the 23d they stopped in a valley full of canes and ebony-trees, where
a lion carried away one of their camels. On the 24th they passed the
Gandova, a large, violent, and dangerous river. The country being
prodigiously woody, one of their beasts of carriage, straggling from
the caravan, was bit on the hip by a bear, as Mr Poncet apprehends.
But we are now in the country corresponding to that inhabited by
the Shangalla, that is one of the hottest in the world, where the
thermometer rises to 100° in the shade. Bears are not found in climates
like this; and most assuredly there are none even in the higher and
colder mountains above. Poncet does not say he saw the bear, but judged
only by the bite, which might have been that of a lion, leopard, or
many other animals, but more probably that of the hyæna.

The 27th they arrived at Girana, a village on the top of a mountain.
Here they left their camels, and began to ascend from the Kolla into
the more temperate climate in the mountains of Abyssinia. From Girana
they came to Barangoa, and the next day to Tchelga, where anciently was
the customhouse of Sennaar while peace and commerce subsisted between
the two kingdoms. The 3d of July they arrived at Barcos, or Bartcho,
about half a day’s journey from Gondar; and on the 9th of August father
Brevedent died. Poncet was himself detained by indisposition at this
village of Barcos till the 21st of July, on which day he set out for
Gondar and arrived in the evening, where he succeeded to his wishes,
performing a complete cure upon his royal patient in a very short time;
and so fulfilled this part of his mission as perfectly as the ablest
physician could have done.

As for the other part with which he was charged, I doubt very much if
it was in his power to perform it in another manner than he did. It
required a mind full of ignorance and presumption, such as was that of
Mr de Maillet and all the missionaries at the head of whom he was,
to believe that it was possible for a private man, such as Poncet,
without language, without funds, without presents, or without power
or possibility of giving them any sort of protection in the way, to
prevail upon 26 or 28 persons, on the word of an adventurer only, to
attempt the traversing countries where they ran a very great risk of
falling into slavery--to do what? why, to go to France, a nation of
Franks whose very name they abhorred, that they might be instructed in
a religion they equally abhorred, to meet with certain death if ever
they returned to their own country; and, unless they did return, they
were of no sort of utility whatever.

M. de Maillet should have informed himself well in the beginning, if it
was possible that the nobility in Abyssinia could be so contemptible as
to suffer twelve of their children to go to countries unknown, upon the
word of a stranger, at least of such a doubtful character as Poncet. I
say doubtful, because, if he was such a man as M. de Maillet represents
him, a drunkard, a liar, a thief, a man without religion, a perpetual
talker, and a superficial practitioner of what he called his own trade,
surely the Abyssinians must have been very fond of emigration, to have
left their homes under the care of such a patron as this. When did M.
de Maillet ever hear of an Abyssinian who was willing to leave his own
country and travel to Cairo, unless the very few priests who go for
duty’s sake, for penances or vows, to Jerusalem? When did he ever hear
of an Abyssinian layman, noble, or plebeian, attending even the Abuna
though the first dignitary of the church? We shall see presently a poor
slave, a Christian Abyssinian boy, immediately under the protection of
M. de Maillet, and going directly from him into the presence of his
king, taken forcibly from the chancellor of the nation[67], and made a
Mahometan before their eyes.

The Abyssinian embassy then demanded from France, and recommended to M.
de Maillet, was a presumptuous, vain, impracticable chimera, which must
have ended in disappointment, and which never could have closed more
innocently than it did.

I shall pass over all that happened during Poncet’s stay at Gondar, as
he did not understand the language, and must therefore have been very
liable to mistake. But as for what he says of armies of 300,000 men;
of the king’s dress at his audience; of his mourning in purple; of
the quantity of jewels he had, and wore; of his having but one wife;
and of large stone-crosses being erected on the corners of the palace
at Gondar; these, and several other things, seem to me to have been
superadded afterwards. Nor do I think what is said of the churches and
Christians remaining in the kingdom of Dongola, nor the monstrous lie
about the golden rod suspended in the air in the convent of Bisan[68],
is at all the narrative of Poncet, but of some fanatic, lying friar,
into whose possession Poncet’s manuscript might have fallen. The
journey itself, such as I have restored it, is certainly genuine; and,
as I believe it describes the best and safest way into Abyssinia, I
have rectified some of the few errors it had, and now recommend it to
all future travellers, and to the public.

This is to be understood of his travels to Abyssinia, his journey in
returning being much more inaccurate and incomplete, the reason of
which we have in his own words: “I have not, says he, exactly noted
down the places through which we passed, the great weakness I then lay
under not permitting me to write as I could have wished.” I shall,
therefore, say little upon his return, as the deficiency will be
carefully supplied by the history of my own journey from Masuah, the
road by which he left the country being very nearly the same as that by
which I entered.

It was on the 2d of May of the year 1700 that Poncet left Gondar and
took his journey to the town of Emfras. Here there is a mistake in the
very beginning. Emfras[69], at which place I staid for several weeks,
is in lat. 12° 12´ 38´´, and long. 37° 38´ 30´´, consequently about 22
miles from Gondar, almost under the same meridian, or south from it;
so that, as he was going to the east, and northward of east, this must
have been so many miles out of his way; for, going towards Masuah, his
first station must have been upon the river Angrab.

The same may be said of his next to Coga. It was a royal residence
indeed, but very much out of his way. He has forgot likewise, when
he says, that, in the way from Gondar to Emfras, you must go over a
very high mountain. The way from Gondar to Emfras is the beaten way to
Begemder, Foggora, and Dara, and so on to the second cataract of the
Nile. It is on that plain the armies were encamped before the battle
of Serbraxos[70], whence the road passes by Correva, which is indeed
upon a rising ground, sloping gently to the lake Tzana, but is not
either mountain or hill.

Seven or eight days are a space of time just enough for the passing
through Woggora, where he justly remarks the heats are not so excessive
as in the places he came from. He takes no notice of the passage of
Lamalmon, which ought to have been very sensible to a man in a decayed
state of health, the less so as he was only descending it. Every thing
which relates to the passage of the Tacazzé is just and proper, only
he calls the river itself the Tekesel, instead of the true name, the
_Tacazzé_. It was the Siris of the ancients; and it is doing justice
to both countries, when he compares the province of Siré with the most
delicious parts of his own country of France. This province is that
also where he might very probably receive the young elephant, which he
says awaited him there as a present to the king of France, and which
died a few days after.

He passed afterwards to Adowa. It is the capital of Tigré, is still the
seat of its governor, and was that of Ras Michael in my time. All that
he says of the intermediate country and its productions, shew plainly
that his work is genuine, and his remarks to be those of an eye-witness.

From this province of Tigré he enters the country of the Baharnagash,
and arrives at Dobarwa, which he erroneously calls Duvarna, and
says it is the capital of the province of Tigré, whereas it is that
of the Baharnagash. Isaac Baharnagash, when in rebellion against his
sovereign, surrendered this town to the Turks in the year 1558, as may
be seen at large in my history of the transactions of those times.

As the authenticity of this journey, and the reality of Poncet’s
having been in Abyssinia, has been questioned by a set of vain,
ignorant, fanatic people, and that from malice only, not from spirit
of investigation, of which they were incapable, I have examined every
part of it, and compared it with what I myself saw, and shall now give
one other instance to prove it genuine, from an observation Poncet has
made, and which has escaped all the missionaries, though it was entire
and visible in my time.

Among the ruins of Axum[71] there is a very high obelisk, flat on both
sides, and fronting the south. It has upon it no hieroglyphic, but
several decorations, or ornaments, the fancy of the architect. Upon a
large block of granite, into which the bottom of it is fixed, and which
stands before it like a table, is the figure of a Greek patera, and on
one side of the obelisk, fronting the south, is the representation of
a wooden door, lock, and a latch to it, which first seems designed to
draw back and then lift up, exactly in the manner those kind of locks
are fashioned in Egypt at this very day. Poncet observed very justly,
there are no such locks made use of in Abyssinia, and wonders how they
should have represented a thing they had never seen, and, having done
so, remained still incapable to make or use it. Poncet was no man of
reading out of his own profession; he nowhere pretends it; he recorded
this fact because he saw it, as a traveller should do, and left others
to give the reason which he could not. Poncet calls this place Heleni,
from a small village of that name in the neighbourhood. Had he been a
scholar he would have known that the ruins he was observing were those
of the city of Axum, the ancient metropolis of this part of Ethiopia.

Ptolemy Evergetes, the third Grecian king of Egypt, conquered this
city and the neighbouring kingdom; resided some time there; and, being
absolutely ignorant of hieroglyphics, then long disused, he left the
obelisk he had erected for ascertaining his latitudes ornamented with
figures of his own choosing, and the inventions of his subjects the
Egyptians, and particularly the door for a convenience of private life,
to be imitated by his new-acquired subjects the Ethiopians, to whom it
had hitherto been unknown.

From Dobarwa he arrived at Arcouva, which, he says, geographers
miscall Arequies. M. Poncet might have spared this criticism upon
geographers till he himself had been better informed, for both are
equally miscalled, whether Arcouva or Arequies. The true and only name
of the place, known either to Mahometans or Christians, is Arkeeko, as
the island to which he passed, crossing an arm of the sea, is called
Masuah, not Messoua, as he everywhere spells it.

From Masuah, Poncet crossed the Red Sea to Jidda, passing the island
Dahalac and Kotumbal, a high rock, the name of which is not known to
many navigators.

Had old Murat, Musa, and Hagi Ali, happened at that time to have been
upon some mercantile errand to Cairo, there is no doubt but they would
have been preferred and become ambassadors to France. They would have
gone there, perplexed the minister and the consul with a thousand
lies and contrivances, which the French never would have been able to
unravel; they would have promised every thing; obtained from the king
some considerable sum of money, on which they would have undertaken
to send the embassy in any form that was prescribed, and, after their
return home, never been heard of more. But those worthies were,
probably, all employed at this time; therefore the only thing Poncet
could do was to bring Murat, since he was to procure at all events an
ambassador.

He had been a cook to a French merchant at Aleppo; was a maker of
brandy at Masuah; and probably his uncle old Murat’s servant at the
time. But he was not the worse ambassador for this. Old Murat, Hagi
Ali, and Musa, had perhaps been also cooks and servants in their
time. Prudence, sobriety, and good conduct, skill in languages, and
acquaintance, with countries recommended them afterwards to higher
trusts. Old Murat probably meant that his nephew should begin his
apprenticeship with that embassy to France; and M. Poncet, to increase
his consequence, and fulfil the commission the consul gave him, allowed
him to invent all the rest.

Poncet, from Jidda, went to Tor, and thence to Mount Sinai, where,
after some stay, being overtaken by Murat, they both made their entry
into Cairo.

M. de Maillet, the consul, was an old Norman gentleman, exceedingly
fond of nobility, consequently very haughty and overbearing to those
he reckoned his inferiors, among which he accounted those of his own
nation established at Cairo, though a very amiable and valuable set
of men. He was exceedingly testy, choleric, obstinate, and covetous,
though sagacious enough in every thing concerning his own interest. He
lived for the most part in his closet, seldom went out of his house,
and, as far as I could learn, never out of the city. There, however, he
wrote a description of all Egypt, which since has had a considerable
degree of reputation[72].

Maillet had received advice of the miserable state of this embassy from
Jidda, that the Sherriffe of Mecca had taken from Poncet, by force,
two female Abyssinian slaves, and that the elephant was dead; which
particulars being written to France, he was advised in a letter from
father Fleuriau by no means to promote any embassy to the court of
Versailles; that a proper place for it was Rome; but that in France
they looked upon it in the same light as they did upon an embassy from
Algiers or Tunis, which did no honour to those who sent it, and as
little to those that received it; this, however, was a new light.

M. de Maillet, by this letter, becoming master of the ambassador’s
destiny, began first to quarrel with him upon etiquette, or who should
pay the first visit; and, after a variety of ill-usage, insisted upon
seeing his dispatches. This Murat refused to permit, upon which the
consul sent privately to the basha, desiring him to take the dispatches
or letters from Murat, sending him at the same time a considerable
present.

The basha on this did not fail to extort a letter from Murat by threats
of death. He then opened it. It was in Arabic, in very general and
indifferent terms, probably the performance of some Moor at Masuah,
written at Murat’s instance. And well was it for all concerned that it
was so; for had the letter been a genuine Abyssinian letter, like those
of the empress Helena and king David III. proposing the destruction
of Mecca, Medina, and the Turkish ships on the Red Sea, the whole
French nation at Cairo would have been massacred, and the consul and
ambassador probably impaled.

The Jesuits, ignorant of this manœvure of M. de Maillet, but alarmed
and scandalized at this breach of the law of nations, for such the
basha’s having opened a letter, addressed to the king of France, was
justly considered, complained to M. Feriol the French ambassador at
Constantinople, who thereupon sent a capigi from the port, to inquire
of the basha what he meant by thus violating the law of nations, and
affronting a friendly power of such consequence as France.

These capigis are very unwelcome guests to people in office to whom
they are sent. They are always paid by those they are sent to. Besides
this, the report they carry back very often costs that person his
life. The basha, accused by the capigi at the instance of the French
ambassador at Constantinople, answered like an innocent man, That he
had done it by desire of the French consul, from a wish to serve him
and the nation, otherwise he should never have meddled in the matter.
The consequence was, M. de Maillet was obliged to pay the basha the
expence of the capigi; and, having some time afterwards brought it in
account with the merchants, the French nation at Cairo, by deliberation
of the 6th of July of the year 1702, refused to pay 1515 livres, the
demand of the basha, and 518 livres for those of his officers.

The consul, however, had gained a complete victory over Murat, and
thereupon determined to send Monhenaut, chancellor of France at Cairo,
with letters, which, though written and invented by himself, he
pretended to be translations from the Ethiopian original.

But father Verseau, the Jesuit, now returned to Cairo, who had entered
into a great distrust of the consul since the discovery of his intrigue
with the basha about Murat’s letter, resolved to be of the party.
Poncet, who was likewise on bad terms with the consul, neither inclined
to lose the merits of his travels into Abyssinia, nor trust the recital
of it to Monhenaut, or to the manner in which it might be represented
in the consul’s letters. These three, Monhenaut, Poncet, and Verseau,
set out therefore for Paris with very different views and designs. They
embarked at Bulac, the shipping-place of Cairo upon the Nile, taking
with them the ears of the dead elephant.

The remaining part of the present brought for the king of France by
this illustrious embassy, was an Abyssinian boy, a slave bought by
Murat, and who had been hid from the search of the Sherriffe, when he
forcibly took from him the two Abyssinian girls, part of the intended
present also. This boy no sooner embarked on board the vessel at Bulac
than a great tumult arose. The janizaries took the boy out of the
vessel by force, and delivered him to Mustapha Cazdagli, their kaya;
nor could all the interest of M. de Maillet and the French nation, or
all the manœuvres of the Jesuits, ever recover him.

As for Monhenaut, Poncet, and Verseau, his protectors, they were
obliged to hide themselves from the violence of the mob, nor dared
they again to appear till the vessel sailed. And happy was it for them
that this fell out at Cairo, for, had they offered to embark him at
Alexandria, in all probability it would have cost all of them their
lives.

I must beg leave here to suggest to the reader, how dangerous, as
well as how absurd, was the plan of this embassy. It was to consist
of twenty-eight Abyssinians, twelve of whom were to be sons of noble
families, all to be embarked to France. What a pleasant day would the
embarkation have been to M. de Maillet! What an honourable appearance
for his king, in the eyes of other Christian princes, to have seen
twenty-eight Christians under his immediate protection, twelve of
whom we might say were princes, (as all the nobility in Abyssinia are
directly of the family of the king), from motives of vanity only, by
the pride of the Jesuits, and the ignorance of the consul, hurried in
one day into apostacy and slavery! Whatever Maillet thought of Poncet’s
conduct, his bringing Murat, and him only, cook as he was, was the very
luckiest accident of his life.

I know French flatterers will say this would not have happened, or,
if it had, a vengeance would have followed, worthy the occasion and
the resentment of so great a king, and would have prevented all such
violations of the law of nations for the future. To this I answer, The
mischief would have been irreparable, and the revenge taken, however
complete, would not have restored them their religion, and, without
their religion, they themselves would not have returned into their own
country, but would have remained necessary sacrifices, which the pride
and rashness of the Jesuits had made to the faith of Mahomet.

Besides, where is the threatened revenge for the assassination of M.
du Roule, then actual ambassador from the king of France, of which I
am now to speak? Was not the law of nations violated in the strongest
manner possible by his murder, and without the smallest provocation?
What vengeance was taken for this?--Just the same as would have been
for the other injury; for the Jesuits and consul would have concealed
the one, as tenderness for the Franciscan Friars had made them cover
the other, left their abominable wickedness should be exposed. If the
court of France did not, their consul in Cairo should have known what
the consequence would be of decoying twenty-eight Abyssinians from
their own country, to be perverted from their own religion, and remain
slaves and Mahometans at Cairo, a nuisance to all European nations
established there.

Upon the arrival of the triumvirate at Paris, Monhenaut immediately
repaired to the minister; Verseau was introduced to the king, and
Poncet, soon after, had the same honour. He was then led as a kind
of show, through all Paris, cloathed in the Abyssinian dress, and
decorated with his gold chain. But while he was vainly amusing himself
with this silly pageantry, the consul’s letters, and the comments made
upon them by Monhenaut, went directly to destroy the credit of his ever
having been in Abyssinia, and of the reality of Murat’s embassy.

The Franciscan friars, authors of the murder of M. du Roule, enemies to
the mission, as being the work of the Jesuits; M. Piques, member of the
Sorbonne, a body never much distinguished for promoting discoveries,
or encouraging liberal and free inquiry; Abbé Renaudot, M. le Grande,
and some ancient linguists, who, with great difficulty, by the industry
of M. Ludolf, had attained to a very superficial knowledge of the
Abyssinian tongue, all fell furiously upon Poncet’s narrative of his
journey. One found fault with the account he gave of the religion of
the country, because it was not so conformable to the rites of the
church of Rome, as they had from their own imagination and prejudice,
and for their own ends conceived it to be. Others attacked the truth
of the travels, from improbabilities found, or supposed to be found,
in the description of the countries through which he had passed; while
others discovered the forgery of his letters, by faults found in the
orthography of that language, not one book of which, at that day, they
had ever seen.

All these empty criticisms have been kept alive by the merit of the
book, by this alone they have any further chance of reaching posterity;
while, by all candid readers, this itinerary, short and incomplete as
it is, will not fail to be received as a valuable acquisition to the
geography of these unknown countries of which it treats.

I think it but a piece of duty to the memory of a fellow-traveller, to
the lovers of truth and the public in general, to state the principal
objections upon which this outcry against Poncet was raised; that, by
the answers they admit of, the world may judge whether they are or are
not founded in candour, and that before they are utterly swallowed up
in oblivion.

The first is, that of the learned Renaudot, who says he does not
conceive how an Ethiopian could be called by the name of Murat. To
this I answer, Poncet, de Maillet, and the Turkish Basha, say Murat
was an Armenian, a hundred times over; but M. Renaudot, upon his own
authority, makes him an Ethiopian, and then lays the blame upon others,
who are not so ignorant as himself.

Secondly, Poncet asserts Gondar was the capital of Ethiopia; whereas
the Jesuits have made no mention of it, and this is supposed a strong
proof of Poncet’s forgery. I answer, The Jesuits were banished in
the end of Socinios’s reign, and the beginning of that of his son
Facilidas, that is about the year 1632; they were finally extirpated in
the end of this last prince’s reign, that is before the year 1666, by
his ordering the last Jesuit Bernard Nogueyra, to be publicly hanged.
Now Gondar was not built till the end of the reign of Hannes I. who was
grandson to Socinios, that is about the year 1680. Unless, then, these
holy Jesuits, who, if we believe the missionaries, had all of them a
sight into futurity before their martyrdom, had, from these their _last
visions_, described Gondar as capital of Abyssinia, it does not occur
to me how they should be historians of a fact that had not existence
till 50 years after they were dead.

Thirdly, Poncet speaks of towns and villages in Ethiopia; whereas
it is known there are no towns, villages, or cities, but Axum.--I
believe that if the Abyssinians, who built the large and magnificent
city of Axum, never had other cities, towns, and villages, they were
in this the most singular people upon earth; or, if places where
6000 inhabitants live together in contiguous houses, separated with
broad streets where there are churches and markets, be not towns and
villages, I do not know the meaning of the term; but if these are
towns, Poncet hath said truth; and many more such towns, which he never
did see nor describe, are in Abyssinia at this day.

Fourthly, The Abyssinians live, and always have lived, in tents, not in
houses.--It would have been a very extraordinary idea in people living
in tents to have built such a city as Axum, whose ruins are as large
as those of Alexandria; and it would be still more extraordinary, that
people, in such a climate as Abyssinia, in the whole of which there
is scorching weather for six months, deluges of rain, storms of wind,
thunder, lightning, and hurricanes, such as are unknown in Europe,
for the other six, should choose to live in tents, after knowing how
to build such cities as Axum. I wonder a man’s understanding does not
revolt against such absurdities in the moment he is stating them.

The Abyssinians, while at war, use tents and encampments, to secure the
liberty of movements and changing of ground, and defend themselves,
when stationary, from the inclemency of the weather. But no tent has,
I believe, yet been invented that could stand in the fields in that
country from June to September; and they have not yet formed an idea of
Abyssinia who can suppose this.

I conceive it is _ignorance_ of the language which has led these
_learned_ men into this mistake. The Abyssinians call a house, standing
by itself, allotted to any particular purpose, Bet. So Bet Negus is a
palace, or the house of a king; Bet Christian is a church, or a house
for Christian worship; whilst Bet Mocha is a prison, or house under
ground. But houses in towns or villages are called Taintes, from the
Abyssinian word Tain, to sleep, lie down, rest, or repose. I suppose
the similitude of this word to tents has drawn these _learned_ critics
to believe, that, instead of towns, these were only collections of
tents. But still I think, no one acquainted with the Abyssinian
language, or without being so, would be so void of understanding as to
believe, a people that had built Axum of stone, should endure, for ages
after, a tropical winter in bare tents.

The fifth thing that fixes falsehood upon Poncet is, that he describes
delicious valleys beyond European ideas; beautiful plains, covered
with odoriferous trees and shrubs, to be everywhere in his way on the
entrance of Abyssinia; whereas, when Salidan’s brother conquered
this country, the Arabian books say they found it destitute of all
this fruitfulness. But, with all submission to the Arabian books, to
Abbé Renaudot and his immense reading, I will maintain, that neither
Salidan, nor his brother, nor any of his tribe, ever conquered the
country Poncet describes, nor were in it, or ever saw it at a distance.

The province where Poncet found these beautiful scenes lies between
lat. 12 and 13°. The soil is rich, black mould, which six months
tropical rain are needed to water sufficiently, where the sun is
vertical to it twice a-year, and stationary, with respect to it, for
several days, at the distance of 10°, and at a lesser distance still
for several months; where the sun, though so near, is never seen, but
a thick screen of watery clouds is constantly interposed, and yet the
heat is such, that Fahrenheit’s thermometer rises to 100° in the shade.
Can any one be so ignorant in natural history, as to doubt that, under
these circumstances, a luxuriant, florid, odoriferous vegetation must
be the consequence? Is not this the case in every continent or island
within these limits all round the globe?

But Poncet contradicts the Arabian books, and all travellers, modern
and ancient; for they unanimously agree that this country is a dreary
miserable desert, producing nothing but Dora, which is millet, and such
like things of little or no value. I wish sincerely that M. Renaudot,
when he was attacking a man’s reputation, had been so good as to name
the author whose authority he relied on. I shall take upon me to deny
there ever was an Arabian book which treated of this country. And with
regard to the ancient and modern travellers, his quotations from
them are, if possible, still more visionary and ridiculous. The only
ancient travellers, who, as I believe, ever visited that country, were
Cambyses’s ambassadors; who, probably, passed this part of Poncet’s
track when they went to the Macrobii, and the most modern authors (if
they can be called modern) that came nearest to it, were the men sent
by Nero[73] to discover the country, whose journey is very doubtful;
and they, when they approached the parts described by Poncet, say “the
country began to be green and beautiful.” Now I wish M. Renaudot had
named any traveller more modern than these messengers of Nero, or more
ancient than those ambassadors of Cambyses, who have travelled through
and described the country of the Shangalla.

I, that have lived months in that province, and am the only traveller
that ever did so, must corroborate every word Poncet has said upon this
occasion. To dwell on landscapes and picturesque views, is a matter
more proper for a poet than a historian. Those countries which are
described by Poncet, merit a pen much more able to do them justice,
than either his or mine.

It will be remembered when I say this, it is of the country of the
Shangalla, between lat. 12° and 13° north, that this is the people who
inhabit a hot woody stripe called Kolla, about 40 or 50 miles broad,
that is from north to south, bounded by the mountainous country of
Abyssinia, till they join the Nile at Fazuclo, on the West.

I have also said, that, for the sake of commerce, these Shangalla have
been extirpated in two places, which are like two gaps, or chasms,
in which are built towns and villages, and through which caravans
pass between Sennaar and Abyssinia. All the rest of this country is
impervious and inaccessible, unless by an armed force. Many armies have
perished here. It is a tract totally unknown, unless from the small
detail that I have entered into concerning it in my travels.

And here I must set the critic right also, as to what he says of the
produce of these parts. There is no grain called Dara, at least that I
know of. If he meant millet, he should have called it Dora. It is not a
mark of barrenness in the ground where this grows: part of the finest
land in Egypt is sown with it. The banks of the Nile which produce
Dora would also produce wheat; but the inhabitants of the desert like
this better; it goes farther, and does not subject them to the violent
labour of the plough, to which all inhabitants of extreme hot countries
are averse.

The same I say of what he remarks with regard to cotton. The finest
valleys in Syria, watered by the cool refreshing springs that fall from
Mount Libanus, are planted with this shrub; and, in the same grounds
alternately, the tree which produces its sister in manufactures, silk,
whose value is greatly inhanced by the addition. Cotton clothes all
Ethiopia; cotton is the basis of its commerce with India, and of the
commerce between England, France, and the Levant; and, were it not for
some such ignorant, superficial reasoners as Abbé Renaudot, cotton,
after wool, should be the favourite manufacture of Britain. It will in
time take place of that ungrateful culture, flax; will employ more
hands, and be a more ample field for distinguishing the ingenuity of
our manufacturers.

We see, then, how the least consideration possible destroys these
ill-founded objections, upon which these very ignorant enemies of
Poncet attempted to destroy his credit, and rob him of the merit of
his journey. At last they ventured to throw off the mask entirely, by
producing a letter supposed to be written from Nubia by an Italian
friar, who asserts roundly, that he hears Poncet was never at the
capital of Ethiopia, nor ever had audience of Yasous; but stole the
clothes and money of father Brevedent, then married, and soon after
forsook his wife and Ethiopia together.

Maillet could have easily contradicted this, had he acted honestly; for
Hagi Ali had brought him the king of Abyssinia’s letter, who thanked
him for his having sent Poncet, and signified to him his recovery.
But without appealing to M. Maillet upon the subject, I conceive
nobody will doubt, that Hagi Ali had a commission to bring a physician
from Cairo to cure his master, and that Poncet was proposed as that
physician, with consent of the consul. Now, after having carried Poncet
the length of Bartcho, where it is agreed he was when Brevedent died,
(for he was supposed there to have robbed that father of his money)
what could be Hagi Ali’s reason for not permitting him to proceed half
a day’s journey farther to the capital, and presenting him to the king,
who had been at the pains and expence of sending for him from Egypt?
What excuse could Hagi Ali make for not producing him, when he must
have delivered the consul’s letters, telling him that Poncet was come
with the caravan for the purpose of curing him?

Besides this, M. de Maillet saw Hagi Ali afterwards at Cairo, where
he reproached him with his cruel behaviour, both to Poncet and to
friar Justin, another monk that had come along with him from Ethiopia.
Maillet then must have been fully instructed of Poncet’s whole life
and conversation in Ethiopia, and needed not the Italian’s supposed
communication to know whether or not he had been in Ethiopia. Besides,
Maillet makes use of him as the forerunner of the other embassy he was
then preparing to Gondar, and to that same king Yasous, which would
have been a very strange step had he doubted of his having been there
before.

Supposing all this not enough, still we know he returned by Jidda,
and the consul corresponded with him there. Now, how did he get from
Bartcho to the Red Sea without passing the capital, and without
the king’s orders or knowledge? Who franked him at those number of
dangerous barriers at Woggora, Lamalmon, the Tacazzé, Kella, and Adowa,
where, though I had the authority of the king, I could not sometimes
pass without calling force to my assistance? Who freed him from the
avarice of the Baharnagash, and the much more formidable rapacity of
that murderer the Naybe, who, we have seen in the history of this
reign, attempted to plunder the king’s own factor Musa, though his
master was within three days journey at the head of an army that in a
few hours could have effaced every vestige of where Masuah had stood?
All this, then, is a ridiculous fabrication of lies; the work, as I
have before said, of those who were concerned in the affair of the
unhappy Du Roule.

Poncet, having lost all credit, retired from Paris in disgrace, without
any further gratification than that which he at first received. He
carried to Cairo with him, however, a gold watch and a mirror, which he
was to deliver to the consul as a present to his companion Murat, whose
subsistence was immediately stopped, and liberty given him to return to
Ethiopia.

Nor did Maillet’s folly stop here. After giving poor Murat all the
ill-usage a man could possibly suffer, he entrusted him with a
Jesuit[74] whom he was to introduce into Ethiopia, where he would
certainly have lost his life had not the bad-treatment he received by
the way made him return before he arrived at Masuah.

This first miscarriage seemed only to have confirmed the Jesuits more
in their resolution of producing an embassy. But it now took another
form. Politicians and statesmen became the actors in it, without a
thought having been bestowed to diminish the enemies of the scheme, or
render their endeavours useless, by a superior knowledge of the manners
and customs of the country through which this embassy was to pass.

No adventurer, or vagrant physician, (like Poncet) was to be employed
in this second embassy. A minister versed in languages, negociations,
and treaties, accompanied with proper drugomans and officers, was to
be sent to Abyssinia to cement a perpetual friendship and commerce
between two nations that had not a national article to exchange with
each other, nor way to communicate by sea or land. The minister, who
must have known this, very wisely, at giving his fiat, pitched upon the
consul M. de Maillet to be the ambassador, as a man who was acquainted
with the causes of Poncet’s failure, and, by following an opposite
course, could bring this embassy to a happy conclusion for both nations.

Maillet considered himself as a general whose business was to direct
and not to execute. A tedious and troublesome journey through dangerous
deserts was out of the sphere of his closet, beyond the limits of which
he did not choose to go. Beyond the limits of this, all was desert to
him. He excused himself from the embassy, but gave in a memorial to
serve as a rule for the conduct of his successor in the nomination in
a country he had never seen; but this, being afterwards adopted as a
well-considered regulation, proved one of the principal causes of the
miscarriage and tragedy that followed.

M. Noir du Roule, vice-consul at Damiata, was pitched upon as the
ambassador to go to Abyssinia. He was a young man of some merit, had
a considerable degree of ambition, and a moderate skill in the common
languages spoken in the east, but was absolutely ignorant of that of
the country to which he was going, and, what was worse, of the customs
and prejudices of the nations through which he was to pass. Like most
of his countrymen, he had a violent predilection for the dress,
carriage, and manners of France, and a hearty contempt for those of
all other nations; this he had not address enough to disguise, and
this endangered his life. The whole French nation at Cairo were very
ill-disposed towards him, in consequence of some personal slight, or
imprudences, he had been guilty of; as also towards any repetition of
projects which brought them, their commerce, and even their lives into
danger, as the last had done.

The merchants, therefore, were averse to this embassy; but the Jesuits
and Maillet were the avowed supporters of it, and they had with them
the authority of the king. But each aimed to be principal, and had very
little confidence or communication with his associate.

As for the capuchins and Franciscans, they were mortally offended with
M. de Maillet for having, by the introduction of the Jesuits, and the
power of the king of France, forcibly wrested the Ethiopic mission from
them which the pope had granted, and which the sacred congregation of
cardinals had confirmed. These, by their continual communication with
the Cophts, the Christians of Egypt, had so far brought them to adopt
their designs as, one and all, to regard the miscarriage of du Roule
and his embassy, as what they were bound to procure from honour and
mutual interest.

Things being in these circumstances, M. du Roule arrived at Cairo, and
took upon him the charge of this embassy, and from that moment the
intrigues began.

The consul had persuaded du Roule, that the proper presents he should
take with him to Sennaar were prints of the king and queen of France,
with crowns upon their heads; mirrors, magnifying and multiplying
objects, and deforming them; when brocade, sattin, and trinkets of gold
or silver, iron or steel, would have been infinitely more acceptable.

Elias, an Armenian, a confidential servant of the French nation, was
first sent by way of the Red Sea into Abyssinia, by Masuah, to proceed
to Gondar, and prepare Yasous for the reception of that ambassador,
to whom he, Elias, was to be the interpreter. So far it was well
concerted; but, in preparing for the end, the middle was neglected. A
number of friars were already at Sennaar, and had poisoned the minds
of that people, naturally barbarous, brutal, and jealous. Money, in
presents, had gained the great; while lies, calculated to terrify and
enrage the lower class of people, had been told so openly and avowedly,
and gained such root, that the ambassador, when he arrived at Sennaar,
found it, in the first place, necessary to make a _procez verbal_, or
what we call a precognition, in which the names of the authors, and
substance of these reports, were mentioned, and of this he gave advice
to M. de Maillet, but the names and these papers perished with him.

It was on the 9th of July 1704 that M. du Roule set out from Cairo,
attended by a number of people who, with tears in their eyes, foresaw
the pit into which he was falling. He embarked on the Nile; and, in
his passage to Siout, he found at every halting-place some new and
dangerous lie propagated, which could have no other end but his
destruction.

Belac, a Moor, and factor for the king of Sennaar, was chief of the
caravan which he then joined. Du Roule had employed, while at Cairo,
all the usual means to gain this man to his interest, and had every
reason to suppose he had succeeded. But, on his meeting him at Siout,
he had the mortification to find that he was so far changed that it
cost him 250 dollars to prevent his declaring himself an abettor of
his enemies. And this, perhaps, would not have sufficed, had it not
been for the arrival of Fornetti, drugoman to the French nation at
Cairo, at Siout, and with him a capigi and chiaoux from Ismael Bey, the
port of janizaries, and from the basha of Cairo, expressly commanding
the governor of Siout, and Belac chief of the caravan, to look to the
safety of du Roule, and protect him at the hazard of their lives, and
as they should answer to them.

All the parties concerned were then called together; and the fedtah,
or prayer of peace, used in long and dangerous journies, was solemnly
recited and assented to by them all; in consequence of which, every
individual became bound to stand by his companion even to death, and
not separate himself from him, nor see him wronged, though it was for
his own gain or safety. This test brought all the secret to light;
for Ali Chelebi, governor of Siout, informed the ambassador, that the
Christian merchants and Franciscan friars were in a conspiracy, and
had sworn to defeat and disappoint his embassy even by the loss of his
life, and that, by presents, they had gained him to be a partner in
that conspiracy.

Belac, moreover, told him, that the patriarch of the Cophts had assured
the principal people of which that caravan consisted, that the Franks
then travelling with him were not merchants, but sorcerers, who were
going to Ethiopia, to obstruct, or cut off the course of the Nile, that
it might no longer flow into Egypt, and that the general resolution was
to drive the Franks from the caravan at some place in the desert which
suited their designs, which were to reduce them to perish by hunger or
thirst, or else to be otherwise slain, and no more heard of.

The caravan left Siout the 12th of September. In twelve days they
passed the lesser desert, and came to Khargué, where they were detained
six days by a young man, governor of that place, who obliged M. du
Roule to pay him 120 dollars, before he would suffer him to pass
further; and at the same time forced him to sign a certificate, that he
had been permitted to pass without paying any thing. This was the first
sample of the usage he was to expect in the further prosecution of his
journey.

On the 3d of October they entered the great desert of Selima, and on
the 18th of same month they arrived at Machou, or Moscho, on the Nile,
where their caravan staid a considerable time, till the merchants had
transacted their business. It was at this place the ambassador learned,
that several Franciscan friars had passed the caravan while it remained
at Siout, and advanced to Sennaar, where they had staid some time, but
had lately left that capital upon news of the caravan’s approaching,
and had retired, nobody knew whether.

A report was soon after spread abroad at Cairo, but no one could
ever learn whence it came, that the ambassador, arriving at Dongola,
had been assassinated there. This, indeed, proved false, but was, in
the mean time, a mournful presage of the melancholy catastrophe that
happened soon afterwards.

M. du Roule arrived at Sennaar towards the end of May, and wrote at
that time; but a packet of letters was after brought to the consul at
Cairo, bearing date the 18th of June. The ambassador there mentions,
that he had been well received by the king of Sennaar, who was a young
man, fond of strangers; that particular attention had been shewn
him by Sid Achmet-el-coom; or, as he should have called him, Achmet
Sid-el-coom, i.e. Achmet master of the household. This officer, sent
by the king to visit the baggage of the ambassador, could not help
testifying his surprise to find it so inconsiderable, both in bulk and
value.

He said the king had received letters from Cairo, informing him that he
had twenty chests of silver along with him. Achmet likewise told him,
that he himself had received information, by a letter under the hand
and seal of the most respectable people of Cairo, warning him not to
let M. du Roule pass; for the intention of his journey into Abyssinia
was to prevail on Yasous to attack Masuah and Suakem, and take them
from the Turks. Achmet would not suffer the bales intended for the king
of Abyssinia to be opened or visited, but left them in the hands of the
ambassador.

M. du Roule, however, in writing this account to the consul, intimated
to him that he thought himself in danger, and declares that he did
not believe there was on earth so barbarous, brutal, and treacherous a
people, as were the Nubians.

It happened that the king’s troops had gained some advantage over the
rebellious Arabs, on which account there was a festival at court,
and M. du Roule thought himself obliged to exert himself in every
thing which could add to the magnificence of the occasion. With this
intention he shaved his beard, and drest himself like a European, and
in this manner he received the visit of the minister Achmet. M. Macé,
in a letter to the consul of the above date, complains of this novelty.
He says it shocked every body; and that the[75]mirrors which multiplied
and deformed the objects, made the lower sorts of the people look upon
the ambassador and his company as sorcerers.

Upon great festivals, in most Mahometan kingdoms, the king’s wives have
a privilege to go out of their apartments, and visit any thing new that
is to be seen. These of the king of Sennaar are very ignorant, brutish,
fantastic, and easily offended. Had M. du Roule known the manners of
the country, he would have treated these black majesties with strong
spirits, sweetmeats, or scented waters; and he might then have shewed
them with impunity any thing that he pleased.

But being terrified with the glasses, and disgusted by his inattention,
they joined in the common cry, that the ambassador was a magician,
and contributed all in their power to ruin him with the king; which,
after all, they did not accomplish, without the utmost repugnance and
difficulty. The farthest length at first they could get this prince to
go was, to demand 3000 dollars of the ambassador. This was expressly
refused, and private disgust followed.

M. du Roule being now alarmed for his own safety, insisted upon liberty
to set out forthwith for Abyssinia. Leave was accordingly granted him,
and after his baggage was loaded, and every thing prepared, he was
countermanded by the king, and ordered to return to his own house. A
few days after this he again procured leave to depart; which a short
time after was again countermanded. At last, on the 10th of November,
a messenger from the king brought him final leave to depart, which,
having every thing ready for that purpose, he immediately did.

The ambassador walked on foot, with two country Christians on one hand,
and Gentil his French servant on the other. He refused to mount on
horseback, but gave his horse to a Nubian servant to lead. M. Lipi,
and M. Macé, the two drugomans, were both on horseback. The whole
company being now arrived in the middle of the large square before the
king’s house, the common place of execution for criminals, four blacks
attacked the ambassador, and murdered him with four strokes of sabres.
Gentil fell next by the same hands, at his master’s side. After him M.
Lipi and the two Christians; the two latter protesting that they did
not belong to the ambassador’s family.

M. du Roule died with the greatest magnanimity, fortitude, and
resignation. Knowing his person was sacred by the law of nations, he
disdained to defend it by any other means, remitting his revenge to the
guardians of that law, and he exhorted all his attendants to do the
same. But M. Macé the Drugoman, young and brave, and a good horseman,
was not of the sheep kind, to go quietly to the slaughter. With his
pistols he shot two of the assassins that attacked him, one after the
other, dead upon the spot; and was continuing to defend himself with
his sword, when a horseman, coming behind him, thrust him through the
back with a lance, and threw him dead upon the ground.

Thus ended the second attempt of converting Abyssinia by an embassy.
A scheme, if we believe M. de Maillet, which had cost government a
considerable expence, for in a memorial, of the 1st of October 1706,
concerning the death of M. du Roule, he makes the money and effects
which he had along with him, when murdered, to amount to 200 purses, or
L.25,000 Sterling. This, however, is not probable; because, in another
place he speaks of M. du Roule’s having demanded of him a small supply
of money while at Sennaar, which friar Joseph, a capuchin, refused
to carry for him. Such a supply would not have been necessary if the
ambassador had with him such a sum as that already mentioned; therefore
I imagine it was exaggerated, with a view to make the Turkish basha of
Suakem quarrel with the king of Sennaar about the recovering it.

The friars, who were in numbers at Sennaar, left it immediately before
the coming of M. du Roule. This they might have done without any bad
intention towards him; they returned, however, immediately after his
murder. This, I think, very clearly constitutes them the authors of
it. For had they not been privy and promoters of the assassination,
they would have fled with fear and abhorrence from a place where six of
their brethren had been lately so treacherously slain, and were not yet
buried, but their carcases abandoned to the fowls of the air, and the
beasts of the field, and where they themselves, therefore, could have
no assurance of safety.

They however pretended, first to lay the blame upon the king of
Abyssinia, then upon the king of Sennaar, and then they divided it
between them both. But Elias, arrived at Gondar, vindicated that
prince, as we shall presently see, and the list of names taken at
Sennaar; and a long series of correspondence, which afterwards came
out, and a chain of evidence which was made public, incontestibly prove
that the king of Sennaar was but an agent, and indeed an unwilling one,
who two several times repented of his bloody design, and made M. du
Roule return to his own house, to evade the execution of it.

The blood then of this gallant and unfortunate gentleman undoubtedly
lies upon the heads of the reformed Franciscan friars, and their
brethren, the friars of the Holy Land. The interest of these two
bodies, and a bigotted prince, such as Louis XIV then was, was more
than sufficient to stop all inquiry, and hinder any vengeance to
be taken on those holy assassins. But he who, unperceived, follows
deliberate murther through all its concealments and darkness of its
ways, in a few years required satisfaction for the blood of du Roule,
at a time and place unforeseen, and unexpected.

We shall now return to Gondar to king Yasous, who being recovered of
his disease, and having dismissed his physician, was preparing to set
out on a campaign against the Galla.

Yasous, for his first wife, had married Ozoro Malacotawit, a lady of
great family and connections in the province of Gojam. By her he had
a son, Tecla Haimanout, who was grown to manhood, and had hitherto
lived in the most dutiful affection and submission to his father,
who, on his part, seemed to place unlimited confidence in his son. He
now gave a proof of this, not very common in the annals of Abyssinia,
by leaving Tecla Haimanout behind him, at an age when he was fit to
reign, appointing him Betwudet, with absolute power to govern in his
absence. Yasous had a mistress whom he tenderly loved, a woman of great
quality likewise, whose name was Ozoro Kedustè. She was sister to his
Fit-Auraris, Agné, a very distinguished and capable officer, and by her
he had three children, David, Hannes, and Jonathan.

It happened, while he was watching the motions of the Galla, news were
brought that Ozoro Kedustè had been taken ill of a fever; and though,
upon this intelligence, he disposed his affairs so as to return with
all possible expedition, yet when he came to Bercanté, the lady’s
house, he found that she was not only dead, but had been for some
time buried. All his presence of mind now left him; he fell into the
most violent transport of wild despair, and, ordering her tomb to be
opened, he went down into it, taking his three sons along with him,
and became so frantic at the sight of the corpse, that it was with the
utmost difficulty he could be forced again to leave the sepulchre.
He returned first to Gondar, then he retired to an island in the lake
Tzana, there to mourn his lost mistress.

But before this, Elias, ignorant of what had passed at Sennaar,
presented M. de Maillet’s letter to him, beseeching his leave for
M. du Roule to enter Abyssinia, and come into his presence. This he
easily procured: Yasous was fond of strangers; and not only granted the
request, but sent a man of his own to Sennaar with letters to the king
to protect and defray the expences of the ambassador to Gondar. This
man, who had affairs of his own, loitered away a great deal of time in
the journey, so that Elias, upon first hearing of the arrival of the
ambassador, set out himself to meet him at Sennaar. The king, in the
mean time, having finished his mourning, dispatched Badjerund Oustas
to his son the Betwudet, at Gondar, ordering him forthwith to send him
a body of his household troops to rendezvous on the banks of the lake,
opposite to the island Tchekla Wunze, where he then had his residence.

It has been said, contrary to all truth, by those who have wrote
travels into this country, that sons born in marriage had the same
preference in succession as they have in other countries. But this, as
I have said, is entirely without foundation: For, in the first place,
there is no such thing as a regular marriage in Abyssinia; all consists
in mere consent of parties. But, allowing this to be regular, not only
natural children, that is, those born in concubinage where no marriage
was in contemplation; and adulterous bastards, that is, the sons of
unmarried women by married men; and all manner of sons whatever,
succeed equally as well to the crown as to private inheritance; and
there cannot be a more clear example of this than in the present
king, who, although he had a son, Tecla Haimanout, born of the queen
Malacotawit in wedlock, was yet succeeded by three bastard brothers,
all sons of Yasous, born in adultery, that is, in the life of the
queen. David and Hannes were sons of the king by his favourite Ozoro
Kedustè; Bacuffa, by another lady of quality.

Although the queen, Malacotawit, had passed over with seeming
indifference the preference the king had given his mistress, Ozoro
Kedustè, during her lifetime, yet, from a very unaccountable kind of
jealousy, she could not forgive those violent tokens of affection
the king had shewn after her death, by going down with his sons and
remaining with the body in the grave. Full of resentment for this, she
had persuaded her son, Tecla Haimanout, that Yasous had determined to
deprive him of his succession, to send him and her, his mother, both
to Wechné, and place his bastard brother, David, son of Ozoro Kedustè,
upon the throne.

The queen had been very diligent in attaching to her the principal
people about the court. By her own friends, and the assistance of the
discontented and banished monks, she had raised a great army in Gojam
under her brothers, Dermin and Paulus. Tecla Haimanout had shewn great
signs of wisdom and talents for governing, and very much attached to
himself some of his father’s oldest and ablest servants.

It was, therefore, agreed, in return to Yasous’s message by Oustas,
to answer, That, after so long a reign, and so much bloodshed, the
king would do well to retire to some convent for the rest of his
life, and atone for the many great sins he had committed; and that he
should leave the kingdom in the hands of his son Tecla Haimanout, as
the ancient king Caleb had resigned his crown into the hands of St
Pantaleon in favour of his son Guebra Mascal. As it was not very safe
to deliver such a message to a king such as Yasous, it was therefore
sent to him, by a common foot-soldier, who could not be an object of
resentment.

The king received it at Tchekla Wunze, the island in the lake Tzana,
where he was then residing. He answered with great sharpness, by the
same messenger, “That he had been long informed who these were that had
seduced his son, Tecla Haimanout, at once from his duty to him as his
father, and his allegiance as his sovereign; that though he did not
hold them to be equal in sanctity to St Pantaleon, yet, such as they
were, he proposed immediately to meet them at Gondar, and settle there
his son’s coronation.”

This ironical message was perfectly understood. Those of the court
that were with Tecla Haimanout, and the inhabitants of the capital,
met together, and bound themselves by a solemn oath to live and die
with their king Tecla Haimanout. The severity of Yasous was well known;
his provocation now was a just one; and the measure of vengeance that
awaited them, every one concerned knew to be such that there was no
alternative but death or victory.

Neither party were slack in preparations. Kasmati Honorius, governor of
Damot, a veteran officer and old servant of Yasous, collected a large
body of troops and marched them down the west side of the lake. Yasous
having there joined them, and putting himself at the head of his army,
began his march, rounding the lake on its south side towards Dingleber.

Neither did Tecla Haimanout delay a moment after hearing his father was
in motion, but marched with his army from Gondar, attended with all the
ensigns of royalty. He encamped at Bartcho, in that very field where
Za Denghel was defeated and slain by his rebellious subjects. Thinking
this a post ominous to kings, he resolved to wait for his father there,
and give him battle.

The king, in his march through the low country of Dembea, was attacked
by a putrid fever, very common in those parts, which so increased upon
him that he was obliged to be carried back to Tchekla Wunze. This
accident discouraged his whole party. His army, with Honorius, took the
road to Gojam, but did not disperse, awaiting the recovery of the king.

But the queen, Malacotawit, no sooner heard that Yasous her husband
was sick at Tchekla Wunze, than she sent to her son Tecla Haimanout
to leave his unwholesome station, and march back immediately to
Gondar; and, as soon as he was returned, she dispatched her two
brothers, Dermin and Paulus, with a body of soldiers and two Mahometan
musqueteers, who, entering the island Tchekla Wunze by surprise,
shot and disabled the king while sitting on a couch; immediately
after which, Dermin thrust him through with a sword. They attempted
afterwards to burn the body, in order to avoid the ill-will the
sight of it must occasion: In this, however, they were prevented by
the priests of the island and the neighbouring nobility, who took
possession of the body, washed it, and performed all the rites of
sepulture, then carried it in a kind of triumph, with every mark of
magnificence due to the burial of a king, interring it in the small
island of Mitraha, where lay the body of all his ancestors, and where I
have seen the body of this king still entire.

Nor did the prince his son, Tecla Haimanout, now king, discourage the
people in the respect they voluntarily paid to his father. On the
contrary, that parricide himself shewed every outward mark of duty, to
the which inwardly his heart had been long a stranger.

Poncet, who saw this king, gives this character of him: He says he
was a man very fond of war, but averse to the shedding of blood.
However this may appear a contradiction, or said for the sake of the
antithesis, it really was the true character of this prince, who, fond
of war, and in the perpetual career of victory, did, by pushing his
conquests as far as they could go, inevitably occasion the spilling of
much blood. Yet, when his army was not in the field, though he detected
a multitude of conspiracies among priests and other people at home,
whose lives in consequence were forfeited to the law, he very rarely,
either from his own motives, or the persuasion of others, could be
induced to inflict capital punishments though often strongly provoked
to it.

Upon his death the people unanimously gave to him the name of Tallac,
which signifies _the Great_, a name he has ever since enjoyed
unimpeached in the Abyssinian annals, or history of his country, from
the which this his reign is taken.

[Illustration]




TECLA HAIMANOUT I.

From 1704 to 1706.

_Writes in Favour of Du Roule--Defeats the Rebels--Is assassinated
while hunting._


Elias the Armenian, of whom we have already spoken, and who was
charged with letters of protection from Yasous to meet M. du Roule at
Sennaar, had reached within three days journey of that capital when
he heard that king Yasous was assassinated. Terrified at the news, he
returned in the utmost haste to Gondar, and presented the letters,
which had been written by Yasous, to be renewed by his son, king Tecla
Haimanout. Tecla Haimanout read his father’s letters, and approved of
their contents, ordering them to be copied in his own name; and Elias
without delay set out with them. I have inserted a translation of these
letters, which were originally written in Arabic, and seem to me to
be of the few that are authentic among those many which have been
published as coming from Abyssinia.

“The king Tecla Haimanout, son of the king of the church of Ethiopia,
king of a thousand churches.

[Illustration: JESUS son of MARY
Race of Solomon Son of David, Israel, Edom, Isaac.[76]]

“On the part of the powerful august king, arbiter of nations, shadow
of God upon earth, the guide of kings who profess the religion of the
Messiah, the most powerful of Christian kings, he that maintains order
between Mahometans and Christians, protector of the boundaries of
Alexandria, observer of the commandments of the gospel, descended of
the line of the prophets David and Solomon,--may the blessing of Israel
be upon our prophet and upon them.--To the king Baady, son of the king
Ounsa, may his reign be full of happiness, being a prince endowed with
these rare qualities that deserve the highest praises as governing his
kingdom with distinguished wisdom, and by an order full of equity.--The
king of France, who is a Christian, wrote a letter seven or eight
years ago, by which he signified to me, that he wished to open a trade
for the advantage of his subjects and of mine, which request we have
granted. We come at present to understand, that he has sent us presents
by a man whose name is du Roule, who has likewise several others along
with him, and that these people have been arrested at your town of
Sennaar. We require of you, therefore, to set them immediately at
liberty, and to suffer them to come to us with all the marks of honour,
and that you should pay regard to the ancient friendship which has
always subsisted between our predecessors, since the time of the _king
of Sedgid_ and the _king of Kim_, to the present day. We also demand
of you to suffer all the subjects of the king of France to pass, and
all those that come with letters of his consul who is at Cairo, as all
such Frenchmen come for trade only, being of the same religion with
us. We likewise recommend to you, that you permit to pass freely, all
French Christians, Cophts, and Syrians who follow our rites, observing
our religion, and who intend coming into our country; and that you do
not suffer any of those who are contrary to our religion to pass, such
as the monk Joseph, and his companions, whom you may keep at Sennaar,
it being in no shape our intention to suffer them to come into our
dominions, where they would occasion troubles, as being enemies to our
faith. God grant you your desires.”--Wrote the 10th of Zulkadé, Anno
1118, _i. e._ the 21st of January 1706.

    ☞The direction is--“To king Baady, son of king Ounsa, may God
    favour him with his grace.”

The first thing I remark upon this letter is, the mention of the
ancient peace and friendship which subsisted between the predecessors
of these two princes now corresponding. It was a friendship, he says,
that had endured from the time of the king of _Sedgid_, and the king of
_Kim_, to the present day.

The kingdom of Sennaar, as we shall see, was but a modern one, and
recently established by conquest over the Arabs. Therefore the kingdoms
of _Sedgid_ and of _Kim_ were before that conquest, places whence this
black nation came that had established their sovereignty at Sennaar by
conquest: from which, therefore, I again infer, there never was any
war, conquest, or tribute between Abyssinia and that state.

The Arabs, who fed their flocks near the frontiers of the two
countries, were often plundered by the kings of Abyssinia making
descents into Atbara; but this was never reckoned a violation of peace
between the two sovereigns. On the contrary, as the motive of the
Arabs, for coming south into the frontiers of Abyssinia, was to keep
themselves independent, and out of the reach of Sennaar, when the king
of Abyssinia fell upon them there, he was understood to do that monarch
service, by driving them down farther within his reach. The Baharnagash
has been always at war with them; they are tributary to him for eating
his grass and drinking his water, and nothing that he ever does to
them gives any trouble or inquietude to Sennaar. It is interpreted as
maintaining his ancient dominion over the Shepherds, those of Sennaar
being a new power, and accounted as usurpers.

M. de Maillet, nor M. le Grande his historian, have not thought fit
to explain who the monk Joseph was mentioned in this letter. Now it
is certain, that, when Murat and Poncet were returned from Abyssinia,
there was a missionary of the minor friars, who arrived in Ethiopia,
had an audience of the king, and wrote a letter in his name to the
pope, wherein he has foisted many improbabilities and falsehoods;
and concludes with declaring on the part of Yasous, that he submits
to the see of Rome in the same manner the kings his predecessors had
submitted. He makes Yasous speak Latin, too; and it is perfectly
plain from the[77]whole letter, that, though he writes it himself, he
cannot conceal that the king Yasous wanted him very much away, and
was very uneasy at his stay at Gondar. Who this was we know not, but
suppose it was one of those assassins of M. du Roule, carrying on a
private intrigue without participation of the consul, some of whom were
afterwards detected in Walkayt in the reign of David IV.

As for Elias, the forerunner of the French embassy, now become the only
remains of it, he continued in Abyssinia (to judge by his letter) in
great poverty, till the year 1718, immediately after which he went over
to Arabia Felix, and first wrote from Mocha to M. de Maillet consul
at Cairo, as it will appear in the reign of David IV. where I have
inserted his letter; that written to M. du Roule in the name of Yafous,
that of Tecla Haimanout to the Basha and Divan of Cairo, I have now
here inserted, because I have advanced facts founded upon them.


TRANSLATION _of an_ ARABIC LETTER _from the_ KING _of_ ABYSSINIA _to_
M. DU ROULE.

“The king Tecla Haimanout, king of the established church, son of the
king of a thousand churches.

“This letter cometh forth from the venerable, august king, who is the
shadow of God, guide of Christian princes that are in the world, the
most powerful of the Nazarean kings, observer of the commandments
of the gospel, protector of the confines of Alexandria, he that
maintaineth order between Mahometans and Christians, descended from the
family of the prophets David and Solomon, upon whom being the blessings
of Israel, may God make his happiness eternal, and his power perpetual,
and protect his arms--So be it.--To his excellence the most virtuous
and most prudent man du Roule, a Frenchman sent to us, may God preserve
him, and make him arrive at a degree of eminence--So be it.--Elias,
your interpreter whom you sent before you, being arrived here, has been
well received. We have understood that you are sent to us on the part
of the king of France our brother, and are surprised that you have been
detained at Sennaar. We send to you at present a letter for king Baady,
in order that he may set you at liberty, and not do you any injury,
nor to those that are with you, but may behave in a manner that is
proper both for you and to us, according to the religion of Elias that
you sent, who is a Syrian; and all those that may come after you from
the king of France our brother, or his consul at Cairo, shall be well
received, whether they be ambassadors or private merchants, because
we love those that are of our religion. We receive with pleasure those
who do not oppose our laws, and we send away those that do oppose them.
For this reason we did not receive immediately Joseph[78] with all his
companions, not choosing that such sort of people should appear in our
presence, nor intending that they should pass Sennaar, in order to
avoid troubles which may occasion the death of many; but with respect
to you, have nothing to fear, you may come in all safety, and you shall
be received with honour.”--Written the 10th of the month Zulkadé, Anno
1118, _i. e._ the 21st of January of the year 1706.

    ☞ The address is--“Let the present be delivered to M. du Roule
    at the town of Sennaar.”

I shall only observe upon this letter, that all the priests, who had
flocked to Sennaar before M. du Roule arrived there, disappeared upon
his near approach to that city, after having prepared the mischief
which directly followed. And, no sooner was the murder, which they
before concerted, committed, than they all flocked back again as if
invited to a festival. M. de Maillet speaks of several of them in his
letters, where he complains of the murder of du Roule, and says that
they were then on their way to enter Abyssinia. Of these probably was
this Joseph, whom Tecla Haimanout strictly prohibits to come farther
than Sennaar, having seen what his father had written concerning him in
the first letters Elias was charged with.

Others are mentioned in Elias’s letter to the consul as having been in
Abyssinia. He calls them those of the league of Michael and Samuel,
of whom we shall speak afterwards. But, even though the French consul
had ordered his nation to drive all the subjects of Sennaar from their
houses and service, none of these missionaries were afraid to return
and abide at Sennaar, because they knew the murder of the ambassador
was the work of their own hands, and, without their instigation, would
never have been committed.

The unlucky messenger, Elias, was again about to enter Sennaar, when
he received information that du Roule was assassinated. If he had
fled hastily from this inauspicious place upon the murder of Yasous,
his haste was now ten-fold, as he considered himself engaged in the
same circumstances that had involved M. du Roule’s attendants in his
misfortunes.

The king, upon hearing the account given by Elias of the melancholy
fate of the ambassador at Sennaar, was so exasperated, that he gave
immediate orders for recalling such of his troops as he had permitted
to go to any considerable distance; and, in a council held for that
purpose, he declared, that he considered the death of M. du Roule as
an affront that immediately affected his crown and dignity. He was,
therefore, determined not to pass it over, but to make the king of
Sennaar sensible that he, as well as all the other kings upon earth,
knew the necessity of observing the law of nations, and the bad
consequence of perpetual retaliations that must follow the violation of
it. In the mean time, thinking that the basha of Cairo was the cause of
this, he wrote the following letter to him.


TRANSLATION _of an_ ARABIC LETTER _from the_ KING _of_ ABYSSINIA _to
the_ BASHA _and_ DIVAN _of_ CAIRO.

“To the Pacha, and Lords of the Militia of Cairo.

“On the part of the king of Abyssinia, the king Tecla Haimanout, son of
the king of the church of Abyssinia.

“On the part of the august king, the powerful arbiter of nations,
shadow of God upon earth, the guide of kings who profess the religion
of the Messiah, the most powerful of all Christian kings, he who
maintains order between Mahometans and Christians, protector of the
confines of Alexandria, observer of the commandments of the gospel,
heir from father to son of a most powerful kingdom, descended of the
family of David and Solomon,--may the blessing of Israel be upon our
prophet, and upon them may his happiness be durable, and his greatness
lasting, and may his powerful, army be always feared.--To the most
powerful lord, elevated by his dignity, venerable by his merits,
distinguished by his strength and riches among all Mahometans, the
refuge of all those that reverence him, who by his prudence governs
and directs the armies of the noble empire, and commands his confines;
victorious viceroy of Egypt, the four corners of which shall be always
respected and defended:--so be it.--And to all the distinguished
princes, judges, men of learning, and other officers whose business
it is to maintain order and good government and to all commanders
in general, may God preserve them all in their dignities, in the
nobleness of their health. You are to know that our ancestors never
bore any envy to other kings, nor did they ever occasion them any
trouble, or shew them any mark of hatred. On the contrary, they have,
upon all occasions, given them proofs of their friendships, assisting
them generously, relieving them in their necessities, as well in what
concerns the caravan and pilgrims of Mecca in Arabia Felix, as in the
Indies, in _Persia_, and other distant and out-of-the-way places, also
by protecting distinguished persons in every urgent necessity.

“Nevertheless, the king of France our brother, who professes our
religion and our law, having been induced thereto, by some advances of
friendship on our part such as are proper, sent an ambassador to us;
I understand that you caused arrest him at Sennaar, and also another
by name Murat, the Syrian, whom you did put in prison also, though he
was sent to that ambassador on our part, and by thus doing, you have
violated the law of nations, as ambassadors of kings ought to be at
liberty to go wherever they will; and it is a general obligation to
treat them with honour, and not to molest or detain them, nor should
they be subject to pay customs, or any sort of presents. We could very
soon repay you in kind, if we were inclined to revenge the insult
you have offered to the man Murat sent on our part; the Nile would
be sufficient to punish you, since God hath put into our power his
fountain, his outlet, and his increase, and that we can dispose of the
same to do you harm; for the present we demand of, and exhort you to
desist from any future vexations towards our envoys, and not disturb
us by detaining those who shall be sent towards you, but you shall let
them pass and continue their route without delay, coming and going
wherever they will freely for their own advantage, whether they are our
subjects or Frenchmen, and whatever you shall do to or for them, we
shall regard as done to or for ourselves.”

    ☞ The address is--“To the basha, princes, and lords governing
    the town of great Cairo, may God favour them with his goodness.”

There are several things very remarkable in this letter. The king of
Abyssinia values himself, and his predecessors, upon never having
molested or troubled any of his neighbours who were kings, nor borne
any envy towards them. We are not then to believe what we see often in
history, that there was frequent war between Sennaar and Abyssinia,
or that Sennaar was tributary to Abyssinia. That stripe of country,
inhabited by the Shangalla, would, in this case, have been first
conquered. But it is more probable, that the great difference of
climate which immediately takes place between the two kingdoms, the
great want of water on the frontiers, barriers placed there by the hand
of Nature, have been the means of keeping these kingdoms from having
any mutual concerns; and so, indeed, we may guess by the utter silence
of the books, which never mention any war at Sennaar till the beginning
of the reign of Socinios.

I apprehend, that protecting distinguished persons upon great
occasions, alludes to the children of the king of Sennaar, who
frequently fly after the death of their father to Abyssinia[79] for
protection, it being the custom of that state to murder all the
brothers of the prince that succeeds, instead of sending them to a
mountain, as they do in Abyssinia.

The next thing remarkable is his protection of the pilgrims who go to
Mecca, and the merchants that go to India. Several caravans of both
set out yearly from his kingdom, all Mahometans, some of whom go to
Mecca for religion, the others to India, by Mocha, to trade. But it is
not possible to understand how he is to protect the trade in Persia,
with which country he certainly has had no sort of concern these 800
years, nor has it been in that time possible for him either to molest
or protect a Persian. What, therefore, I would suppose, is, that the
king has made use of the common phrase which universally obtains here
both in writing and conversation, calling Ber el Ajam the West, and Ber
el Arab the East coast of the Red Sea.--Ber el Ajam, in the language of
the country, is the coast where there is water or rain, in opposition
to the Tehama, or opposite shore of Arabia, where there is no water.
The Greeks and Latins translated this word into their own language, but
did not understand it; only from the sound they called it Azamia, from
Ajam. Now Ajam, or Ber el Ajam, is the name of Persia also; and the
French interpreter says, the king of Abyssinia protects the caravans of
Persia; when he should say, the caravans, going through Ber el Ajam,
the Azamia of the ancients, to embark at the two ports Suakem and
Masuah, both in the country of that name.

The next thing to remark here is, that the king acknowledges Murat to
be his ambassador; and it is the arresting him, which we have seen
was done at the instance of M. de Maillet collusively, that the king
says was a violation of the law of nations; and it was this insult,
done to Murat his ambassador, that he all along complains of, not that
offered to du Roule, which he leaves to the king of France; for he
says expressly, if he was to starve, or destroy them all, by stopping
the Nile from coming into Egypt, it would be on account of the insult
offered to Murat, the envoy, or man, sent on his part to France. It is
plain, therefore, that M. de Maillet persecuted the poor Syrian very
wrongfully, and that in no one instance, from first to last, was he
ever in the right concerning that embassy.

This step, which justice dictated, was not without its reward; for
Tecla Haimanout, who had assembled his army on this account sooner than
he otherwise intended, found immediately after, that a rival and rebel
prince, Amda Sion, was set up against him by the friends of his father
Yasous, and that he had been privately collecting troops, intending to
take him by surprise, when he was, however, at the head of his army
ready to give him battle.

The first thing the king did was to dispatch a large body of troops to
reinforce Dermin, governor of Gojam, and to him he sent positive orders
to force Amda Sion to fight wherever he should find him, while he, with
the royal army, came forward with all expedition to keep the people in
awe, and prevent them from joining his rival.

Amda Sion, on the other hand, lost no time. From Ibaba, through
Maitsha, he marched straight to Gondar. Being arrived at the king’s
house at Dingleber, he sat down on the throne with the ensigns of
royalty about him, and there appointed several officers that were most
needed, in the army, the provinces, and about his person. During his
stay here, news were brought that Dermin had followed him step by step
in the very track he had marched, and laid the whole country waste that
had shewn him any countenance or favour. Amda Sion’s heart seemed to
fail him upon this; for he left Dingleber, crossed the ford at Delakus,
and endeavoured to pass Dermin, by keeping on the west side of the
Nile, and on the low road by which he returned to Ibaba.

Dermin, well-informed as to his motions, and perfectly instructed in
the situation of the country, instead of passing him, turned short
upon his front, crossing the Nile at Fagitta, and forced him to an
engagement in the plain country of Maitsha. The battle, though it was
obstinately fought by the rebels, ended in a complete victory in favour
of the king. Those among the rebels who most distinguished themselves
were the banished monks, the greatest part of whom were slain fighting
desperately. Among these, were Abba Welleta Christos, Tobias and his
brother Abba Nicolaus, who had been ringleaders in the late religious
disputes in the time of Yasous, and were now chiefs of the rebellion
against his son.

The greatest part of the loss fell upon the common men of Gojam, of
the clans Elmana and Densa. No man of note among them was lost; only
Amda Sion, who fell at their head in the beginning of the engagement,
fighting with all the bravery that could be expected from a man in his
circumstances. The rebel army was entirely dispersed. On the king’s
side no man of consideration was slain, but Anastè, son of Ozoro Sabel
Wenghel.

After having reinforced Dermin, the first thing the king did was
to send three of his brothers, David, Hannes, and Jonathan, to be
imprisoned on the mountain of Wechné. He then marched with his army
from Gondar; and, being ignorant of what had happened, he dispatched
his master of the horse, by way of Dingleber, to join Kasmati Dermin,
in case he had not still been strong enough to fight the rebels. With
his main army he took the road to Tedda, intending to proceed to Gojam;
but, by the way, was informed that Dermin had defeated and slain his
rival Amda Sion: and he had scarce crossed the Nile at Dara, when
another messenger arrived with news that Dermin had also come up with
Kasmati Honorius and his army on the banks of the Nile, at Goutto, had
entirely defeated and slain him, together with his principal officers,
and dispersed the whole army. Upon this the king marched towards Ibaba,
and was there joined by Dermin, when great rejoicing and feasting
ensued for several days.

On this occasion the king crowned his mother Malacotawit, conferring
upon her the dignity and title of Iteghè; the consequence of which
station I have often described. Having now no longer enemies to
fear, he was persuaded, by some of his favourites, first to dismiss
Dermin and his army, then all the troops that had joined him, and go
with a few of his attendants, or court, to hunt the buffalo in the
neighbouring country, Idi; which council the young prince too rashly
adopted, suspecting no treason.

While the hunting-match lasted, a conspiracy was formed by Gueber Mo,
his two brothers, Palambaras, Hannes, and several others, old officers
belonging to the late king Yasous, who saw that he intended, one by
one, to weed them out of the way as soon as safely he could, and that
the whole power and favour was at last to fall into the hands of the
Iteghé, and her brothers Dermin and Paulus. Accordingly one morning,
the conspirators having surrounded him while riding, one of them thrust
him through the body with a sword, and threw him from his mule upon the
earth. They then laid his body upon a horse, and, with all possible
expedition, carried him to the house of Azena Michael, where he arrived
yet alive, but died immediately upon being taken from the horse.
Badjerund Oustas, and some others of his father’s old officers, who had
attached themselves to him after his father’s death, took the body of
the king and buried it in Quebran.

As soon as this assassination was known, the master of the horse, with
the few troops that he could gather together, came to the palace, and
took a young son of Tecla Haimanout, aged only four years, whom he
proclaimed king, and the Iteghé, Malacotawit, regent of the kingdom.
But Badjerund Oustas, and those who had not been concerned in the
murder of either king, went straight to the mountain of Wechné, and
brought thence Tisilis, that is Theophilus, son to Hannes, and brother
to the late king Yasous, whom they crowned at Emfras, and called him,
by his inauguration name, Atserar Segued.

[Illustration]




TIFILIS.

From 1706 to 1709.

_Dissembles with his Brother’s Assassins--Execution of the
Regicides--Rebellion and Death of Tigi._


Theophilus, a few days after his coronation, having called the whole
court and clergy together, declared to them, that his faith upon the
disputable point concerning our Saviour’s incarnation was different
from that of his brother Yasous, or that of his nephew Tecla Haimanout,
but in every respect conformable to that of the monks of Gojam,
followers of Abba Eustathius, and that of the Iteghè, Malacotawit,
Dermin, and Paulus. A violent clamour was instantly raised against the
king by the priests of Debra Libanos, as having forsaken the religious
principles of his predecessors. But the king was inflexible; and this
ingratiated him more with the inhabitants of Gojam. Not many days
after, the king arrested the master of the horse, Johannes Palambaras,
the Betwudet Tigi, and several others, all supposed to be concerned in
the murder of the late king, and confined them in several places and
prisons.

This last action of the king entirely relieved the minds of all the
friends of Tecla Haimanout from any further fear of being called to
account for the murder of Yasous; and, in consequence of this, the
queen Malocotawit, with her brothers Dermin and Paulus, and all the
murderers of the late king Yasous, came to Gondar that same winter to
do homage to Theophilus, whom they now thought their greatest protector.

But the wise and sagacious king had kept his secret in his own bosom.
All his behaviour hitherto had been only dissimulation, to induce his
brother’s murderers to come within his power. And no sooner did he see
that he had succeeded in this, than the very first day, while they were
yet at audience, he ordered an officer, in his own presence, to arrest
first the queen, and then her two brothers Dermin and Paulus. He gave
the same directions concerning the rest of the conspirators, who were
all scattered about Gondar, eating, drinking, and fearing nothing, but
rejoicing at the happy days they had promised themselves, and were now
to see: he ordered the whole of them, amounting to 37 persons, many of
these of the first rank, to be all executed that same forenoon.

He began with the queen, who was taken immediately from his presence
and hanged by the common hangman on the tree before the palace gate;
the first of her rank, it is believed, that ever died so vile a death,
either in Abyssinia or any other country, the history of which has come
down to our hands. Dermin and Paulus were first carried to the tree
to see their sister’s execution; after which, one after the other,
they were thrust through with swords, the weapon with which they had
wounded the late king Yasous. But the two Mahometans were shot with
muskets, it having been in that manner they had ended the late king’s
life, after Dermin had wounded him with a sword. As they had committed
high treason, none of the bodies of these traitors were allowed to be
buried; they were hewn in small pieces with knives, and strewed about
the streets, to be eat by the hyænas and dogs; a most barbarous and
offensive custom, to which they strictly adhere to this very day.

After having thus taken ample vengeance for the murder of his brother
Yasous, Theophilus did not stop here. Tecla Haimanout was, it is true,
a parricide, but he was likewise a king, and his nephew; nor did it
seem just to Theophilus that it should be left in the will of private
subjects, after having acknowledged Tecla Haimanout as their sovereign,
to choose a time afterwards, in which they were to cut him off for
a crime which, however great, had not hindered them from swearing
allegiance to him at his accession, and entering into his service at
the time when it was recently committed. He, therefore, ordered all the
regicides in custody to be put to death; and sent circular letters to
the several governors, that they should observe the same rule as to all
those directly concerned in the murder of his nephew Tecla Haimanout,
who should be found in places under their command.

Tigi, formerly Betwudet, had been imprisoned in Hamazen, a small
district near the Red Sea, under the government of Abba Saluce.
This man, by birth a Galla, had escaped from Hamazen, and collected
a considerable army of the different tribes of his nation, Liban,
Kalkend, and Basso; and, having found one that pretended to be of the
royal blood, he proclaimed him king, and put his army in motion.

Upon the first news of this revolt, the king, though attended with few
troops, immediately left Gondar, ordering all those whose duty it was
to join him at Ibaba. Having there collected a little army, he marched
immediately for the country of the Basso, destroying every thing with
fire and sword. Tigi, in the mean time, by forced marches came to
Ibaba, where he committed all sorts of cruelties without distinction
of age or sex. The cries of the sufferers reached the king, who turned
immediately back to the relief of Ibaba; and, not discouraged by his
enemy’s great superiority of number, offered battle to them as soon as
he arrived. Nor did Tigi and his Galla refuse it; but, on the 28th day
of March 1709, a very obstinate engagement ensued; where, though the
king was inferior in forces, yet being himself warlike and active, he
was so well seconded by his troops that Basso and Liban were almost
entirely cut off.

In the field of battle there was a church, built by the late king
Yasous after a victory gained there over the Pagans, whence it had the
name it then bore, Debra Mawea, or the _Mountain of Victory_. A large
body of these Galla, seeing that all went against them in the field,
fled to the church for a sanctuary, trusting to be protected from the
fury of the soldiers by the holiness of the place, and they so far
judged well; for the king’s troops, though they surrounded the church
on every side, did not offer to break into it, or molest the enemy that
had sheltered themselves within. Theophilus, informed of this scruple
of his soldiers, immediately rode up to them, crying out, “That the
church was defiled by the entrance of so many Pagans, and no longer
fit for Christian worship, that they should therefore immediately put
fire to it, and he would build a nobler one in its place.” The soldiers
obeyed without further hesitation; and, with cotton wads wrapt about
the balls of their guns, they set fire to the thatch, with which every
church in Abyssinia is covered. The whole was instantly consumed, and
every creature within it perished. Many principal officers and men of
the best families on the king’s side, Billetana Gueta, Sana Denghel,
and Billetana Gueta Kirubel, Ayto Stephenous, son of Ozoro Salla of
Nara, all men of great consideration, were slain that day. What came of
the rebel prince was never known. Tigi, with his two sons, fled from
the field; but they were met by a peasant, who took them prisoners
first; and, after discovering who they were, put them all three to
death, and brought their heads to the king.

After so severe a rebuke, the Galla, on both sides of the Nile, seemed
disposed to be quiet, and the king thereupon returned to Gondar amidst
the acclamations of his soldiers and subjects; but scarce had he
arrived in the capital when he was taken ill of a fever, and died on
the 2d of September, and was buried at Tedda, after a reign of three
years and three months.

[Illustration]




OUSTAS.

From 1709 to 1714.

    _Usurps the Crown--Addicted to hunting--Account of the
    Shangalla--Active and bloody Reign--Entertains Catholic Priests
    privately--Falls sick and dies; but how, uncertain._


It has been already observed in the course of this history, that the
Abyssinians, from a very ancient tradition, attribute the foundation
of their monarchy to Menilek son of Solomon, by the queen of Saba, or
Azab, rendered in the Vulgate, the Queen of the south. The annals of
this country mention but two interruptions to have happened, in the
lineal succession of the heirs-male of Solomon. The first about the
year 960, in the reign of Del Naad, by Judith queen of the Falasha,
of which revolution we have already spoken sufficiently. The second
interruption happened at the period to which we have now arrived in
this history, and owed its origin, not to any misfortune that befel the
royal family as in the massacre of Judith, but seemed to be brought
about by the peculiar circumstances of the times, from a well-founded
attention to self-preservation.

Yasous the Great, after a long and glorious reign, had been murdered by
his son Tecla Haimanout. Two years after, this parricide fell in the
same manner. The assassination of two princes, so nearly related, and
in so short a time, had involved, from different motives, the greatest
part of the noble families of the kingdom, either in the crime itself,
or in the suspicion of aiding and abetting it.

Upon the death of Tecla Haimanout, Tifilis, or Theophilus, brother of
Yasous, had been brought from the mountain, and placed on the throne
as successor to his nephew; this prince was scarcely crowned when he
made some very severe examples of the murderers of his brother, and he
seemed privately taking informations that would have reached the whole
of them, had not death put an end to his inquiries and to his justice.

The family of king Yasous was very numerous on the mountain. It was
the favourite store whence both the soldiery and the citizens chose
to bring their princes. There were, at the very instant, many of his
sons princes of great hopes and of proper ages. Nothing then was more
probable than that the prince, now to succeed, would be of that family,
and, as such, interested in pursuing the same measures of vengeance
on the murderers of his father and of his brother as the late king
Theophilus had done; and how far, or to whom this might extend, was
neither certain nor safe to trust to.

The time was now past when the nobles vied with each other who should
be the first to steal away privately, or go with open force, to take
the new king from the mountain, and bring him to Gondar, his capital:
A backwardness was visible in the behaviour of each of them, because in
each one’s breast the fear was the same.

In so uncommon a conjuncture and disposition of men’s minds, a subject
had the ambition and boldness to offer himself for king, and he was
accordingly elected. This was Oustas[80], son of Delba Yasous, by a
daughter of the late king of that name; and Abyssinia now saw, for the
second time, a stranger seated on the throne of Solomon. Oustas was a
man of undisputed merit, and had filled the greatest offices in the
state. He had been Badjerund, or master of the household, to the late
king Yasous. Tecla Haimanout, who succeeded, had made him governor of
Samen; and though, in the next reign, he had fallen into disgrace with
Theophilus, this served but to aggrandize him more, as he was very soon
after restored to favour, and by this very prince raised to the dignity
of Ras, the first place under the king, and invested at once with the
government of two provinces, Samen and Tigré. He was, at the death of
Theophilus, the greatest subject in Abyssinia; one step higher set him
on the throne, and the circumstances of the time invited him to take
it. He had every quality of body and mind requisite for a king; but the
constitution of his country had made it unlawful for him to reign. He
took, upon his inauguration, the name of Tzai Segued.

Oustas, though a new king, followed the customs of the ancient monarchs
of Abyssinia; for that very reason was unwilling to add novelty to
novelty, and it has been a constant practice with these to make a
public hunting-match the first expedition of their reign. On these
occasions the king, attended by all the great officers of state,
whose merit and capacity are already acknowledged, reviews his young
nobility, who all appear to the best advantage as to arms, horses, and
equipage, with the greatest number of servants and attendants. The
scene of this hunting is always in the Kolla, crowded with an immense
number of the largest and fiercest wild beasts, elephants, rhinoceros,
lions, leopards, panthers, and buffaloes fiercer than them all, wild
boars, wild asses, and many varieties of the deer kind.

As soon as the game is roused, and forced out of the wood by the
footmen and dogs, they all singly, or several together, according to
the size of the beast, or as strength and ability in managing their
horses admit, attack the animal upon the plain with long pikes or
spears, or two javelins in their hands. The king, unless very young,
sits on horseback on a rising ground, surrounded by the graver sort,
who point out to him the names of those of the nobility that are happy
enough to distinguish themselves in his sight. The merit of others is
known by report.

Each young man brings before the king’s tent, as a trophy, a part of
the beast he has slain; the head and skin of a lion or leopard; the
scalp or horns of a deer; the private parts of an elephant; the tail
of a buffalo, or the horn of a rhinoceros. The great trouble, force,
and time necessary to take out the teeth of the elephant, seldom make
them ready to be presented with the rest of the spoils; fire, too, is
necessary for loosing them from the jaw. The head of a boar is brought
stuck upon a lance; but is not touched, as being unclean.

The elephant’s teeth are the king’s perquisites. Of these round ivory
rings are turned for bracelets, and a quantity of them always brought
by him to be distributed among the most deserving in the field, and
kept ever after as certificates of gallant behaviour. Nor is this
mark attended with honour alone. Any man who shall from the king,
queen-regent, or governor of a province, receive so many of these rings
as shall cover his arm down to his wrist, appears before the twelve
judges on a certain day, and there, laying down his arm with these
rings upon it, the king’s cook breaks every one in its turn with a kind
of kitchen-cleaver, whereupon the judges give him a certificate, which
proves that he is entitled to a territory, whose revenue must exceed
20 ounces of gold, and this is never either refused or delayed. All
the different species of game, however, are not equally rated. He that
slays a Galla, or Shangalla, man to man, is entitled to two rings; he
that slays an elephant to two; a rhinoceros, two; a giraffa, on account
of its speed, and to encourage horsemanship, two; a buffalo, two; a
lion, two; a leopard, one; two boars, whose tusks are grown, one; and
one for every four of the deer kind.

Great disputes constantly arise about the killing of these beasts; to
determine which, and prevent feuds and quarrels, a council sits every
evening, in which is an officer called _Dimshasha_, or _Red Cap_, from
a piece of red silk he wears upon his forehead, leaving the top of his
head bare, for no person is allowed to cover his head entirely except
the king, the twelve judges, and dignified priests. This officer
regulates the precedence of one nobleman over another, and is possessed
of the history of all pedigrees, the noblest of which are always
accounted those nearest to the king reigning.

Every man pleads his own cause before the council, and receives
immediate sentence. It is a settled rule, that those who strike the
animal first, if the lance remain upright, or in the same direction
in which it enters the beast, are understood to be the slayers of
the beast, whatever number combat with him afterwards. There is one
exception, however, that if the beast, after receiving the first wound,
tho’ the lance is in him, should lay hold of a horse or man, so that
it is evident he would prevail against them; a buffalo, for example,
that should toss a man with his horns, or an elephant that should take
a horse with his trunk, the man who shall then slay the beast, and
prevent or revenge the death of the man or horse attacked, shall be
accounted the slayer of the beast, and entitled to the premium.

This was the ancient employment of these councils. In my time they kept
up this custom in point of form; the council sat late upon most serious
affairs of the nation; and the death, banishment, and degradation of
the first men in the kingdom were agitated and determined here under
the pretence of sitting to judge the prizes of pastimes. This hunting
is seldom prolonged beyond a fortnight.

The king, from ocular inspection, is presumed to be able to choose
among the young nobility those that are ready for taking the necessary
charges in the army; and it is from his judgment in this that the
priests foretel whether his reign is to be a successful one, or to end
in misfortune and disappointment.

Oustas, having taken a view of his nobility, and attached such to
him as were most necessary for his support, set out for this hunting
with great preparations. The high country of Abyssinia is destitute
of wood; the whole lower part of the mountains is sown with different
sorts of grain; the upper part perfectly covered with grass and all
sorts of verdure. There are no plains, or very small ones. Such a
country, therefore, is unfit for hunting, as it is incapable of either
sheltering or nourishing any number of wild beasts.

The lower country, however, called Kolla, is full of wood, consequently
thinly inhabited. The mountains, not joined in chains or ridges, run
in one upon the other, but, standing each upon its particular base,
are accessible all round, and interspersed with plains. Great rivers
falling from the high country with prodigious violence, during the
tropical rains, have in the plains washed away the soil down to the
solid rock, and formed large basons of great capacity, where, though
the water becomes stagnant in pools when the currents fail above,
yet, from their great depth and quantity, they resist being consumed
by evaporation, being also thick covered with large shady trees whose
leaves never fall. These large trees, which, in their growth, and
vegetation of their branches, exceed any thing that our imagination
can figure, are as necessary for food, as the pools of water are for
cisterns to contain drink for those monstrous beasts, such as the
elephant and rhinoceros, who there make their constant residence,
and who would die with hunger and with thirst unless they were thus
copiously supplied both with food and water.

This country, flat as the deserts on which it borders, has fat black
earth for its soil. It is generally about 40 miles broad, though in
many places broader and narrower. It reaches from the mountains of the
Habab, or Bagla, which run in a ridge, as I have already said, from
the south of Abyssinia[81] north down into Egypt, parallel to the Red
Sea, dividing the rainy seasons, and it stretches like a belt from east
to west to the banks of the Nile, encircling all the mountainous, or
high land part of Abyssinia; which latter country is, at all times,
temperate, and often cold, while the other is unwholesome, hazy, close,
and intolerably hot.

Many nations of perfect blacks inhabit this low country, all Pagans,
and mortal enemies to the Abyssinian government. Hunting these
miserable wretches is the next expedition undertaken by a new king. The
season of this is just before the rains, while the poor savage is yet
lodged under the trees preparing his food for the approaching winter,
before he retires into his caves in the mountain, where he passes that
inclement season in constant confinement, but as constant security; for
these nations are all Troglodytes, and by the Abyssinians are called
Shangalla.

However Oustas succeeded in attaching to him those of the nobility that
partook of his sports, his good fortune in the capital was not equal
to it. A dangerous conspiracy was already forming at Gondar by those
very people who had persuaded him to mount the throne, and whom he had
left at home, from a persuasion that they only were to be trusted with
the support of his interest and the government in his absence.

Upon the first intelligence, the king, with a chosen body of troops,
entered Gondar in the night, and surprised the conspirators while
actually sitting in council. Ras Hezekias, his prime minister, and
Heraclides, master of his household, and five others of the principal
confederates, lost their ears and noses, and were thrown into prison in
such circumstances that they could not live. Benaia Basilé, one of the
principal traitors, and the most obnoxious to the king, escaped for a
time, having had already intelligence of Oustas’s coming.

The king having quieted every thing at Gondar, being at peace with all
his neighbours, and having no other way to amuse his troops and keep
them employed, set out to join the remainder of his young nobility whom
he had left in the Kolla to attack the Shangalla.

The Shangalla were formerly a very numerous people, divided into
distinct tribes, or, as it is called, different nations, living each
separately in distinct territories, each under the government of
the chief of its own name, and each family of that name under the
jurisdiction of its own chief, or head.

These Shangalla, during the fair half of the year, live under the shade
of trees, the lowest branches of which they cut near the stem on the
upper part, and then bend, or break them down, planting the ends of the
branches in the earth. These branches they cover with the skins of wild
beasts. After this they cut away all the small or superfluous branches
in the inside, and so form a spacious pavilion, which at a distance
appears like a tent, the tree serving for the pole in the middle of it,
and the large top overshadowing it so as to make a very picturesque
appearance.

Every tree then is a house, under which live a multitude of black
inhabitants until the tropical rains begin. It is then they hunt the
elephant, which they kill by many various devices, as they do the
rhinoceros and the other large creatures. Those who reside where water
abounds, with the same industry kill the hippopotami, or river-horses,
which are exceedingly numerous in the pools of the stagnant rivers.
Where this flat belt, or country, is broadest, the trees thickest, and
the water in the largest pools, there the most powerful nations live,
who have often defeated the royal army of Abyssinia, and constantly
laid waste, and sometimes nearly conquered, the provinces of Tigré and
Siré, the most warlike and most populous part in Abyssinia.

The most considerable settlement of this nation is at Amba Tzaada,
between the Mareb and Tacazzé, but nearer by one-third to the Mareb,
and almost N. W. from Dobarwa. These people, who have a variety of
venison, kill it in the fair months, and hang it up, cut into thongs as
thick as a man’s thumb, like so many ropes, on the trees around them.
The sun dries and hardens it to a consistence almost like leather, or
the hardest fish sent from Newfoundland. This is their provision for
the winter months: They first beat it with a wooden mallet, then boil
it, after which they roast it upon the embers; and it is hard enough
after it has undergone all those operations.

The Dobenah, the most powerful of all the Shangalla, who have a
species of supremacy or command over all the rest of the nations, live
altogether upon the elephant or rhinoceros. In other countries, where
there is less water, fewer trees, and more grass, the Shangalla feed
chiefly upon more promiscuous kinds of food, as buffaloes, deer, boars,
lions, and serpents. These are the nations nearer the Tacazzé, Ras el
Feel, and the plains of Siré in Abyssinia, the chief of which nations
is called Baasa. And still farther west of the Tacazzé, and the valley
of Waldubba, is a tribe of these, who live chiefly upon the crocodile,
hippopotamus, and other fish; and, in the summer, upon locusts, which
they boil first, and afterwards keep dry in baskets, most curiously
made with split branches of trees, so closely woven together as to
contain water almost as well as a wooden vessel.

This nation borders nearly upon the Abyssinian hunting-ground; but,
not venturing to extend themselves in the chace of wild beasts, they
are confined to the neighbourhood of the Tacazzé, and rivers falling
into it, where they fish in safety: the banks of that river are
deep, interrupted by steep precipices inaccessible to cavalry, and,
from the thickness of the woods, full of thorny trees of innumerable
species, almost as impervious to foot. These streams, possessed only by
themselves, afford the Baasa the most excellent kinds of fish in the
most prodigious plenty.

In that part of the Shangalla country more to the eastward, about N.
N. E. of Amba Tzaada, in the northern extremities of the woody part,
where the river Mareb, leaving Dobarwa, flows through thick bushes till
it loses itself in the sands, there is a nation of these blacks, who
being near the country of the Baharnagash, an officer whose province
produces a number of horse, dare not, for that reason, venture to make
an extensive use of the variety of wild beasts which throng in the
woods to the southward, for fear of being intercepted by their enemy,
constantly upon the watch for them, part of his tribute being paid in
black slaves. These, therefore, confine themselves to the southern part
of their territory, near the Barabra.

The extraordinary course of this river under the sand, allures to it
multitudes of ostriches, which, too, are the food of the Shangalla,
as is a beautiful lizard, never, that I know, yet described. These
are the food of the eastern Shangalla; and I must here observe, that
this country and people were much better known to the ancients than
to us. The Egyptians traded with them, and caravans of these people
were constantly in Alexandria in the reigns of the first Ptolemies.
Most of the productions of these parts, and the people themselves, are
mentioned in the remarkable procession made by Ptolemy Philadelphus on
his accession to the throne of Egypt, as already observed, though a
confusion often arises therein by this country being called by the name
of India.

Ptolemy, the geographer, classes these people exactly enough,
and distinguishes them very accurately by their particular food,
or dietetique regimen, though he errs, indeed, a little in the
particular situation he gives to the different nations. His Rhizophagi,
Elephantophagi, Acridophagi, Struthiophagi, and Agriophagi, are all the
clans I have just described, existing under the same habits to this day.

This soil, called by the Abyssinians _Mazaga_, when wet by the tropical
rains, and dissolving into mire, forces these savages to seek for
winter-quarters. Their tents under the trees being no longer tenable,
they retire with their respective foods, all dried in the sun, into
caves dug into the heart of the mountains, which are not in this
country basaltes, marble, or alabaster, as is all that ridge which
runs down into Egypt along the side of the Red Sea, but are of a
soft, gritty, sandy stone, easily excavated and formed into different
apartments. Into these, made generally in the steepest part of the
mountain, do these savages retire to shun the rains, living upon the
flesh they have already prepared in the fair weather.

I cannot give over the account of the Shangalla without delivering
them again out of their caves, because this return includes the
history of an operation never heard of perhaps in Europe, and by which
considerable light is thrown upon ancient history. No sooner does the
sun pass the zenith, going southward, than the rains instantly cease;
and the thick canopy of clouds, which had obscured the sky during their
continuance, being removed, the sun appears in a beautiful sky of pale
blue, dappled with small thin clouds, which soon after disappear, and
leave the heavens of a most beautiful azure. A very few days of the
intense heat then dries the ground so perfectly, that it gapes in
chasms; the grass, struck at the roots by the rays, supports itself no
more, but droops and becomes parched. To clear this away, the Shangalla
set fire to it, which runs with incredible violence the whole breadth
of Africa, passing under the trees, and following the dry grass among
the branches with such velocity as not to hurt the trees, but to
occasion every leaf to fall.

A proper distance is preserved between each habitation, and round the
principal watering-places; and here the Shangalla again fix their tents
in the manner before described. Nothing can be more beautiful than
these shady habitations; but they have this fatal effect, that they
are discernible from the high grounds, and guide their enemies to the
places inhabited.

The country now cleared, the hunting begins, and, with the hunting,
the danger of the Shangalla. All the governors bordering upon the
country, from the Baharnagash to the Nile on the west, are obliged to
pay a certain number of slaves. Ras el Feel (my government) was alone
excepted, for a reason which, had I staid much longer in the country,
would probably have been found more advantageous to Abyssinia than
all the slaves they procure by the barbarous and prodigal effusion of
the blood of these unhappy savages; for, when a settlement of these
is surprised, the men are all slaughtered; the women, also, are many
of them slain, many throw themselves down precipices, run mad, hang
themselves, or starve, obstinately refusing food.

The boys and girls under 17 and 18 years of age, (the younger the
better) are taken and educated by the king, and are servants in
all the great houses of Abyssinia. They are instructed early in the
Christian religion, and the tallest, handsomest, and best inclined,
are the only servants that attend the royal person in his palace.
The number of the men was 300 that had horses in my time. They were
once 280, and, before my time, less than 200. These are all cloathed
in coats of mail, and mounted on black horses; always commanded by
foreigners devoted entirely to the king’s will. By strict attention
to their morals, removing all bad examples from among them, giving
premiums to those that read most and best, (for they had all time
enough upon their hands, especially in winter) and, above all, by
the great delight and pleasure the king used to take in conversing
with them while alone, countenancing and rewarding them in the line
he knew I followed, this body became, as to firmness and coolness in
action, equal perhaps to any of the same number in the world; and the
greatest difficulty was keeping them together, for all the great men
used to wish one of them for the charge of his door, which is a very
great trust among the Abyssinians. The king’s easiness was constantly
prevailed upon to promise such, and great inconvenience always followed
this, till Ras Michael discharged this practice by proclamation, and
set the example, by returning four that he himself had kept for the
purpose before mentioned.

While what I have said is still in memory, I must apply a part of
it to explain a passage in Hanno’s Periplus. We saw, says that bold
navigator, when rowing close along the coast of Africa, rivers of fire,
which ran down from the highest mountains, and poured themselves into
the sea; this alarmed him so much, that he ordered his gallies to keep
a considerable offing.

After the fire has consumed all the dry grass on the plain, and, from
it, done the same up to the top of the highest mountain, the large
ravines, or gullies, made by the torrents falling from the higher
ground, being shaded by their depth, and their being in possession of
the last water that runs, are the latest to take fire, though full of
every sort of herbage. The large bamboos, hollow canes, and such like
plants, growing as thick as they can stand, retain their greenness, and
are not dried enough for burning till the fire has cleared the grass
from all the rest of the country. At last, when no other fuel remains,
the herdsmen on the top of the mountains set fire to these, and the
fire runs down in the very path in which, some months before, the water
ran, filling the whole gully with flame, which does not end till it
is checked by the ocean below where the torrent of water entered, and
where the fuel of course ceases. This I have often seen myself, and
been often nearly inclosed in it, and can bear witness, that, at a
distance, and by a stranger ignorant of the cause, it would very hardly
be distinguished from a river of fire.

The Shangalla go all naked; they have several wives, and these very
prolific. They bring forth children with the utmost ease, and never
rest or confine themselves after delivery, but washing themselves and
the child with cold water, they wrap it up in a soft cloth made of the
bark of trees, and hang it upon a branch, that the large ants, with
which they are infested, and the serpents, may not devour it. After a
few days, when it has gathered strength, the mother carries it in the
same cloth upon her back, and gives it suck with the breast, which she
throws over her shoulder, this part being of such a length as, in some,
to reach almost to their knees.

The Shangalla have but one language, and of a very guttural
pronunciation. They worship various trees, serpents, the moon, planets,
and stars in certain positions, which I never could so perfectly
understand as to give any account of them. A star passing near the
horns of the moon denotes the coming of an enemy. They have priests,
or rather diviners; but it should seem that these were looked upon as
servants of the evil-being, rather than of the good. They prophecy bad
events, and think they can afflict their enemies with sickness, even at
a distance. They generally wear copper bracelets upon their wrists and
arms.

I have said the Shangalla have each several wives. This, however,
is not owing to any inordinate propensity of the men to this
gratification, but to a much nobler cause, which should make European
writers, who object this to them, ashamed at the injustice they do
the savage, who all his life, quite the reverse of what is supposed,
shews an example of continence and chastity, which the purest and most
refined European, with all the advantages of education, cannot pretend
to imitate.

It is not the men that seek to avail themselves of the liberty they
have by their usages of marrying as often and as many wives as they
please. Hemmed in on every side by active and powerful enemies, who
consider them as a species of wild beasts, and hunt them precisely as
they do the elephant and rhinoceros, placed in a small territory,
where they never are removed above 20 miles from these powerful
invaders furnished with horses and fire-arms, to both of which they
are strangers, they live for part of the fair season in continual
apprehension. The other part of the season, when the Abyssinian armies
are all collected and abroad with the king, these unhappy savages are
constantly employed in a most laborious hunting of large animals, such
as the rhinoceros, the elephant, and giraffa; and afterwards, in the no
less laborious preparation of the flesh of these quadrupeds, which is
to serve them for food during the six months rains, when each family
retires to its separate cave in the mountain, and has no intercourse
with any of its neighbours, but leaves the country below immersed in a
continual deluge of rain. In none of these circumstances, one should
imagine, the savage, full of apprehension and care, could have much
desire to multiply a race of such wretched beings as he feels himself
to be. It is the wife, not the man, that is the cause of this polygamy;
and this is surely a strong presumption against what is commonly said
of the violence of their inclinations.

Although the Shangalla live in separate tribes, or nations, yet
these nations are again subdivided into families, who are governed
by their own head, or chief, and of a number of these the nation is
composed, who concur in all that regards the measures of defence and
offence against their common enemy the Abyssinian and Arab. Whenever
an expedition is undertaken by a nation of Shangalla, either against
their enemies, the Arabs on the north, or those who are equally their
enemies, the Abyssinians on the south, suppose the nation or tribe to
be the Baasa, each family attacks and defends by itself, and theirs is
the spoil or plunder who take it.

The mothers, sensible of the disadvantage of a small family, therefore
seek to multiply and increase it by the only means in their power;
and it is by their importunity that the husband suffers himself to be
overcome. A second wife is courted for him by the first, in nearly the
same manner as among the Galla.

I will not fear to aver, as far as concerns these Shangalla, or
negroes, of Abyssinia, (and, I believe, most others of the same
complexion, though of different nations), that the various accounts
we have of them are very unfairly stated. To describe them justly, we
should see them in their native purity of manners, among their native
woods, living on the produce of their own daily labours, without other
liquor than that of their own pools and springs, the drinking of which
is followed by no intoxication or other pleasure than that of assuaging
thirst. After having been torn from their own country and connections,
reduced to the condition of brutes, to labour for a being they never
before knew; after lying, stealing, and all the long list of European
crimes, have been made, as it were, necessary to them, and the delusion
occasioned by drinking spirits is found, however short, to be the only
remedy that relieves them from reflecting on their present wretched
situation, to which, for that reason, they most naturally attach
themselves; then, after we have made them monsters, we describe them as
such, forgetful that they are now not as their Maker created them, but
such as, by teaching them our vices, we have transformed them into, for
ends which, I fear, one day will not be found a sufficient excuse for
the enormities they have occasioned.

I would not, by any means, have my readers so far mistake what I have
now said as to think it contains either censure upon, or disapprobation
of, the slave-trade. I would be understood to mean just the contrary;
that the abuses and neglect of manners, so frequent in our plantations,
is what the legislature should direct their coercion against, not
against the trade in general, which last measure, executed so suddenly,
cannot but contain a degree of injustice towards individuals. It is
a shame for any government to say, that enormous cruelties towards
any set of men are so evident, and have arrived to such excess,
without once having been under consideration of the legislature to
correct them. It is a greater shame still for that government to say,
that these crimes and abuses are now grown to such a height that
wholesome severity cannot eradicate them; and it cannot be any thing
but an indication of effeminacy and weakness at once to fall to the
destruction of an object of that importance, without having first tried
a reformation of those abuses which alone, in the minds of sober men,
can make the trade exceptionable.

The incontinence of these people has been a favourite topic with which
blacks have been branded; but, throughout the whole of this history,
I have set down only what I have observed, without consulting or
troubling myself with the systems or authorities of others, only so
far, as having these relations in my recollection, I have compared them
with the fact, and found them erroneous. As late as two centuries ago,
Christian priests were the only historians of heathen manners.

In the number of these Shangalla, or negroes, of which every department
of Gondar was full, I never saw any proof of unbridled desires in
either sex, but very much the contrary; and I must remark, that every
reason in physics strongly militates against the presumption.

The Shangalla of both sexes, while single, go entirely naked: the
married men, indeed, have a very slender covering about their waist,
and married women the same. Young men and young women, till long past
the age of puberty, are totally uncovered, and in constant conversation
and habits with each other, in woods and solitudes, free from
constraint, and without any punishment annexed to the transgression.
Yet criminal commerce is much less frequent among them than in the same
number chosen among Christian nations, where the powerful prejudices of
education give great advantage to one sex in subduing their passions,
and where the consequences of gratification, which always involve some
kind of punishment, keep within bounds the desires of the other.

No one can doubt, but that the constant habit of seeing people of all
ages naked at all times, in the ordinary transactions and necessities
of life, must greatly check unchaste propensities. But there are still
further reasons why, in the nature of things an extraordinary vehemence
of passion should not fall to be a distinguishing characteristic
among the Shangalla. Fahrenheit’s thermometer rises there beyond
100°. A violent relaxation from profuse perspiration must greatly
debilitate the savage. In Arabia and Turkey, where the whole business
of man’s life is the devoting himself to domestic pleasure, men remain
constantly in a sedentary life, eat heartily, avoiding every manner
of exercise, or expence of animal spirits by sweats. Their countries,
too, are colder than that of the Shangalla, who, living sparingly
under a burning sun, and obliged to procure food by laborious hunting,
of consequence deprive themselves of that quantity of animal spirits
necessary to lead them to any extreme of voluptuousness. And that this
is the case is seen in the constitution of the Shangalla women, even
though they are without fatigue.

A woman, upon bearing a child or two, at 10 or 11 years old, sees her
breast fall immediately down to near her knees[82]. Her common manner
of suckling her children is by carrying them upon her back, as our
beggars do, and giving the infant the breast over her shoulders. They
rarely are mothers after 22, or begin child-bearing before they are
10; so that the time of child-bearing is but 12 years. In Europe, very
many examples there are of women bearing children at 14, the civil law
fixes puberty at 12, but by an inuendo[83] seems to allow it may be
something earlier. Women sometimes in Europe bear children at 50. The
scale of years of child-bearing between the savage and the European is,
therefore, as 12 is to 38. There can be little doubt but their desires
are equal to their strength and constitution; but a Shangalla at 22 is
more wrinkled and deformed, apparently by old age, than is a European
woman of 60.

To come still nearer; it is a fact known to naturalists, and which
the application of the thermometer sufficiently indicates, that there
is a great and sensible difference in the degree of animal heat in
both sexes of different nations at the same ages or time of life. The
voluptuous Turk estranges himself from the fairest and finest of his
Circassian and Georgian women in his seraglio, and, during the warm
months in summer, addicts himself only to negro slaves brought from
the very latitudes we are now speaking of; the sensible difference of
the coolness of their skins leading him to give them the preference at
that season. On the other hand, one brown Abyssinian girl, a companion
for the winter months, is sold at ten times the price of the fairest
Georgian or Circassian beauty, for opposite reasons.

The very great regard I shall constantly pay my fair readers has made
me, as they may perceive, enter as tenderly as possible into these
discussions, which, as a philosopher and a historian, I could not,
however, wholly omit: the most useful study of mankind is man; and not
the least interesting view of him is when, stripped of his vain-glory
and the pageantry of palaces, he wanders naked and uncorrupted among
his native woods and rivers.

I must mention, greatly to the credit of two of the first geniuses
of this age, M. de Buffon and Lord Kaimes, that they were both so
convinced by the arguments above mentioned, stated in greater detail
and with more freedom, that they immediately ordered their bookseller
to strike out from the subsequent editions of their work all that had
been advanced against the negroes on this head, which they had before
drawn from the herd of prejudiced and ignorant compilers, strangers to
the manners and language of the people they were dishonouring by their
descriptions, after having before abused them by their tyranny.

The Shangalla have no bread: No grain or pulse will grow in the
country. Some of the Arabs, settled at Ras el Feel, have attempted to
make bread of the feed of the Guinea grass; but it is very tasteless
and bad, of the colour of cow-dung, and quickly producing worms.

They are all archers from their infancy. Their bows are all made of
wild fennel, thicker than the common proportion, and about seven feet
long, and very elastic. The children use the same bow in their infancy
that they do when grown up; and are, by reason of its length, for the
first years, obliged to hold it parallel, instead of perpendicular
to the horizon. Their arrows are full a yard and a half long, with
large heads of very bad iron rudely shaped. They are, indeed, the only
savages I ever knew that take no pains in the make or ornament of this
weapon. A branch of a palm, stript from the tree and made straight,
becomes an arrow; and none of them have wings to them. They have this
remarkable custom, which is a religious one, that they fix upon their
bows a ring, or thong, of the skin of every beast slain by it, while
it is yet raw, from the lizard and serpent up to the elephant. This
gradually stiffens the bow, till, being all covered over, it can be no
longer bent even by its master. That bow is then hung upon a tree,
and a new one is made in its place, till the same circumstance again
happens; and one of these bows, that which its master liked best, is
buried with him in the hopes of its rising again materially with his
body, when he shall be endowed with a greater degree of strength,
without fear of death, or being subjected to pain, with a capacity
to enjoy in excess every human pleasure. There is nothing, however,
spiritual in this resurrection, nor what concerns the soul, but it
is wholly corporeal and material; although some writers have plumed
themselves upon their fancied discovery of what they call the savages
belief of the immortality of the soul.

Before I take leave of this subject, I must again explain, from
what I have already said, a difficult passage in classical history.
Herodotus[84] says, that, in the country we have been just now
describing, there was a nation called Macrobii, which was certainly not
the real name of the Shangalla, but one the Greeks had given them, from
a supposed circumstance of their being remarkable long livers, as that
name imports. These were the western Shangalla, situated below Guba and
Nuba, the gold country, on both sides of the Nile north of Fazuclo.

The Guba and the Nuba, and various black nations that inhabits the
foot of that large chain of mountains called Dyre and Tegla[85], are
those in whose countries the finest gold is found, which is washed from
the mountains in the time of violent rains, and lodged in holes, and
roots of trees and grass, by the torrents, and there picked up by the
natives; it is called Tibbar, or, corruptly, gold-dust. The greatest
part finds its way to Sennaar by the different merchants, Pagan and
Mahometan, from Fazuclo and Sudan. The Agows and Gibbertis also bring
a small quantity of it to Gondar, mostly debased by alloy; but there
is no gold in Abyssinia, nor even in Nubia, west of Tchelga, among the
Shangalla themselves.

Cambyses marched from Egypt expressly with a view of conquering the
gold country, and sent messengers before him to the king, or chief of
it, requiring his immediate submission. I omit romantic and fabulous
circumstances; but the answer of the king of Macrobii to Cambyses was,
Take this bow, and till you can bring me a man that can bend it, you
are not to talk to us of submission. The bow was accordingly carried
back with the defiance, but none of the Persian army could bend it. Yet
it was their own weapon with which they practised from their infancy;
and we are not to think, had it been possible to bend this bow, but
that some of their numerous archers would have done it, for there is no
such disproportion in the strength of men. But it was a bow which had
lost its elastic force from the circumstance above mentioned, and had
been long given up as impossible to be bent by the Macrobii themselves,
and was now taken down from the tree where it had probably some time
hung, and grown so much the less flexible, and intended to be buried,
as these bows are, in the grave with their master, who is to use it,
after his resurrection, in another world, where he is to be endowed
with strength infinitely more than human: it is probable this bow
would have broke, rather than have bent.

If the situation of these Macrobii in Ptolemy did not put it past
dispute that they were Shangalla, we should hesitate much at the
characteristic of the nation; that they were long livers; none of these
nations are so; I scarcely remember an example fairly vouched of a
man past sixty. But there is one circumstance that I think might have
fairly led Herodotus into this mistake; some of the Shangalla kill
their sick, weak, and aged people; there are others that honour old
age, and protect it. The Macrobii, I suppose, were of this last kind,
who certainly, therefore, had many old men, more than the others.

I shall now just mention one other observation tending to illustrate a
passage of ancient history.

Hanno, in his Periplus, remarks, that, while sailing along the coast of
Africa, close by the shore, and probably near the low country called
Kolla, inhabited by the kind of people we have been just describing,
he found an universal silence to prevail the whole day, without any
appearance of man or beast: on the contrary, at night, he saw a
number of fires, and heard the sound of music and dancing. This has
been laughed at as a fairy tale by people who affect to treat Hanno’s
fragment as spurious; for my own part, I will not enter into the
controversy.

A very great genius, (in some matters, perhaps, the greatest that ever
wrote, and in every thing that he writes highly respectable) M. de
Montesqieu, is perfectly satisfied that this Periplus[86] of Hanno is
genuine; and it is a great pleasure again to endeavour to obviate any
doubt concerning the authenticity of the work in this second passage,
as I have before done in another.

In countries, such as those that we have been now describing, and
such as Hanno was then sailing by, when he made the remark, there is
no twilight. The stars, in their full brightness, are in possession
of the whole heavens, when in an instant the sun appears without a
harbinger, and they all disappear together. We shall say, at sun-rising
the thermometer is from 48° to 60°; at 3 o’clock in the afternoon it
is from 100° to 115°; an universal relaxation, a kind of irresistible
languor and aversion to all action takes possession both man and beast;
the appetite fails, and sleep and quiet are the only things the mind is
capable of desiring, or the body of enduring: cattle, birds, and beasts
all flock to the shade, and to the neighbourhood of running streams, or
deep stagnant pools, and there, avoiding the effects of the scorching
sun, pant in quiet and inaction. From the same motive, the wild beast
stirs not from his cave; and for this, too, he has an additional
reason, because the cattle he depends upon for his prey do not stroll
abroad to feed; they are asleep and in safety, for with them are their
dogs and their shepherds.

But no sooner does the sun set, than a cold night instantly succeeds
a burning day; the appetite immediately returns; the cattle spread
themselves abroad to feed, and pass quickly out of the shepherds sight
into the reach of a multitude of beasts seeking for their prey. Fires,
the only remedy, are everywhere lighted by the shepherds to keep these
at a respectful distance; and dancing, singing, and music at once
exhilarate the mind, and contribute, by alarming the beasts of prey,
to keep their flocks in safety, and prevent the bad effects of severe
cold[87]. This was the cause of the observation Hanno made in sailing
along the coast, and it was true when he made it: just the same may be
observed still, and will be, so long as the climate and inhabitants are
the same.

I have been more particular in the history of this extraordinary
nation, because I had, by mere accident, an opportunity of informing
myself fully and with certainty concerning it; and, as it is very
improbable that such an opportunity will occur again to any European, I
hope it will not be ungratefully received.

I shall only add an answer to a very obvious question which may occur.
Why is it that, in this country, nothing that would make bread will
grow? Is it from the ignorance of the inhabitants in not choosing
the proper seasons, or is it the imperfection of the soil? To this I
answer, Certainly the latter. For the inhabitants of Ras el Feel were
used to plow and sow, and did constantly eat bread; but the grain was
produced ten or fifteen miles off upon the sides of the mountains
of Abyssinia, where every certain number of soldiers had small farms
allowed them for that purpose by government; but still they could never
bring up a crop in the Mazaga; and the progress of the miscarriage
was this: Before the month of May all that black earth was rent into
great chasms, trode into dust, and ventilated with hot winds, so as
to be a perfect _caput mortuum_, incapable of any vegetation. Upon
the first sprinkling of rain the chasms are filled up, and the whole
country resembles dry garden-mould newly dug up. As the sun advances
the rains increase; there is no time to be lost now; this is the
season for sowing; let us suppose wheat. In one night’s time, while
the wheat is swelling in the ground, up grows an immense quantity of
indigenous natural grass, that, having sowed itself last year, has lain
ever since in a natural matrix, ready to start at the most convenient
season. Before the wheat, or any grain soever can appear, this grass
has shot up so high and so thick as absolutely to choke it. Suppose
it was possible to hoe or weed it, the grass will again overtop the
grain before it is an inch from the ground. Say it could be again hoed
or cleared, by this time the rains are so continual, the black earth
becomes a perfect mire. The rain increases, and the grain rots without
producing any crop.

The same happens to millet, or Indian corn; the rain rots the plant
which is thrown down by the wind. It is equally destroyed if sown
at the end of the rains; the grass grows up, wherever the ground is
cleared, in a greater proportion, if possible, than in the beginning of
the year; and the rain ceasing abruptly, and the sun beginning to be
intensely hot the very day it passes the zenith, the earth is reduced
to an impalpable powder, whilst the grain and plant die without ever
shewing a tendency to germinate.

We left the king, Oustas, after detecting a conspiracy, ready to fall
upon some settlement of Shangalla. This he executed with great success,
and surrounded a large part of the nation called Baasa, encamped under
the trees suspecting no danger. He put the grown people to the sword,
and took a prodigious number of children of both sexes captive. He
was intending also to push his conquest farther among these savages,
when he was called to Gondar by the death of his prime minister and
confident, Ras Fasa Christos.

Besides his attention to hunting and government, the king had a very
great taste for architecture, which, in Abyssinia, is a very popular
one, though scarcely any thing is built but churches. In the season
that did not permit him to be in the field, he bestowed a great deal of
leisure and money this way; and he was, at this time, busy erecting a
magnificent church to the Nativity, about a mile below Gondar, on the
small river Kahha.

But the season of hunting returning before he had finished it, he left
it to repair to Bet Malo, a place in the Kolla, where he had built a
hunting-seat, not far distant from the Shangalla, called Baasa. Here
he had a most successful hunting-match of the buffalo, rhinoceros,
and elephant, in which he often put himself in great danger, and
distinguished himself in dexterity and horsemanship greatly above any
of his court. He returned upon news, that persons, whom he had secretly
employed, had apprehended Betwudet Basilé, and his son Claudius, who
had escaped when the last conspirators were seized. Both these he
sentenced immediately to lose their eyes.

These hunting-matches, so punctually observed, and so eagerly followed
by a man already past the flower of his youth, had, in their first
appearance, nothing but sound policy. The king’s title was avowedly a
faulty one; and the many conspiracies that had been formed had shewn
him the nobility were not all of them disposed to bear his yoke;
nothing then was more political than to keep a considerable number of
them employed in field-exercises, to be informed of their inclinations,
and to attach them to his person by favours. At the head of this
little, but very active army, he was ready in a moment to fall upon
the disaffected, before they could collect strength sufficient for
resistance. Time, however, shewed this was not entirely the reason of
these continual intervals of absence for so long a time in the Kolla.

Notwithstanding the misfortune that had befallen the French ambassador,
M. du Roule, at Sennaar, in the reign of Yasous I. and Tecla Haimanout
his son, under Baady el Ahmer, there had still remained below, in
Atbara, some of those missionaries who had courage and address enough
to attempt the journey into Abyssinia, and they succeeded in it. Oustas
had probably been privy to their arrival in Yasous’s time, and had,
equally with him, a favourable opinion of the Romish religion.

These missionaries, though Yasous was now dead, were perfectly well
received by Oustas; he had given them in charge to Ain Egzie, an old
and loyal servant of Yasous, and governor of Walkayt. He had placed
also with them an Abyssinian priest, who had been in Jerusalem, and
was well-affected to the Romish faith, to be their interpreter, stay
with them always, and manage their interests, while he himself,
stealing frequently from the hunting-matches, heard mass, and received
the communion, returning back to his camp, as he flattered himself,
unperceived. These meetings with the priests were not, however, so well
concealed but that they came to the knowledge of many people about
court, both seculars and clergy. But the king’s character, for severity
and vigilance, made everybody confine their thoughts, whatever they
were, within their own breasts.

The employment of this year was a short journey to Ibaba, a large
market-town, where there is a royal residence, below Maitsha, on the
west, or Gojam side of the Nile, from which it is about three days
distance. From this he returned again, and went to Tcherkin, a small
village in Kolla, beyond Ras el Feel, in the way to Sennaar, the
principal abode of the elephant. But, in the first day’s hunting,
Yared, master of his household, and a considerable favourite, being
torn to pieces by one of these quadrupeds, he gave over the sport, and
returned very sorrowful to bury him at Gondar, leaving three of his
servants to execute a design he had formed against the Baasa in that
neighbourhood.

From the constant interruptions Oustas had met with in all these
hunting-matches, and his success, notwithstanding, whenever he had
himself attended, the divining monks had prophesied his reign was to
be short, and attended with much bloodshed; nor were they for once
distant from the truth; for, in the month of January 1714, while he
was over-looking the workmen building the church of Abba Antonius at
Gondar, he was taken suddenly ill, and, suspecting some unwholesomeness
or _witchcraft_ in his palace, he ordered his tent to be pitched
without the town till the apartments should be smoaked with gunpowder.
But this was done so carelessly by his servants, that his house was
burnt to the ground, which was looked upon as a very bad omen, and made
a great impression upon the minds of the people.

The 27th of January it was generally understood that the king was
dangerously ill, and that his complaint was every day increasing. Upon
this the principal officers went, according to the usual custom, to
condole with and comfort him. This was at least what they pretended.
Their true errand, however, was pretty well known to be an endeavour to
ascertain whether the sickness was of the kind likely to continue, till
measures could be adopted with a degree of certainty to take the reins
of government out of his hand.

The king easily divined the reason of their coming. Having had a good
night, he used the strength that he had thereby acquired to rouse
himself for a moment, to put on the appearance of health, and shew
himself, as usual, engaged in his ordinary dispatch of business. The
seeming good countenance of the king made their condolence premature.
Some excuse, however, for so formal a visit, was necessary; but
every apology was not safe. They adopted this, which they thought
unexceptionable, that hearing he was sick, which they happily found he
was not, they came to propose to him a thing equally proper whether he
was sick or well; that he would, in time, settle the succession upon
his son Fasil, then in the mountain of Wechné, as a means of quieting
the minds of his friends, preventing bloodshed, and securing the crown
to his family.

Oustas did the utmost to command himself upon this occasion, and to
give them an answer such as suited a man in health who hoped to live
many years. But it was now too late to play such a part; and, in spite
of his utmost dissimulation, evident signs of decay appeared upon him,
which his visitors conjectured would soon be past dissembling, and they
agreed to stay with the king till the evening.

But the soldiers on guard, who heard the proposal of sending for
Oustas’s son, and who really believed that these men spoke from their
heart, and were in earnest, were violently discontented and angry at
this proposal. They began to be weary of novelty, and longed for a
king of the ancient royal family. As soon, therefore, as it was dark
they entered Gondar, and called together the several regiments, or
bodies of soldiers, which composed the king’s household. Having came
to a resolution how they were to act, they returned to their quarters
where they were upon guard, and meeting the great officers coming out
of Oustas’s tent, where they, too, had probably agreed upon the same
measure, though it was not known, the soldiers drew their swords,
and slew them all, being seven in number. Among these were Betwudet
Tamerté, and the Acab Saat; the one the principal lay-officer, the
other the chief ecclesiastic in the king’s house.

This massacre seemed to be the signal for a general insurrection,
in the course of which, part of the town was set on fire. But the
soldiers, at their first meeting in the palace[88], had shut up the
coronation-chamber, and the other royal apartments, and possessed
themselves of the kettle-drum by which all proclamations were made at
the gate, driving away, and rudely treating the multitude on every
side. At last they brought out the drum, though it was yet night, and
made this proclamation:--“David, son of our late king Yasous, is our
king.” The tumult and disorder, nevertheless, still continued; during
all which, it was very remarkable no one ever thought of offering an
injury to Oustas.

While these things were passing at Gondar, a violent alarm had seized
all the princes upon the mountain of Wechné. They had been treated
with severity during Oustas’s whole reign. Their revenues had been
with-held, or at least not regularly paid, and they had been reduced
nearly to perish for want of the necessaries of life. When, therefore,
the accounts of Oustas’s illness arrived, and that the principal
people had proposed to name Fasil his son, then their fellow-prisoner,
to succeed him, their fears no longer reminded them of the hardships
of his father’s reign, as they expected utter extirpation as the only
measure by which he could provide for his own security. Full of these
fears, they agreed, with one consent, to let down from the mountain
fifty princes of the greatest hopes, all in the prime of life, and
therefore most capable of defending their own right, and securing
the lives of those that remained upon the mountain, from the cruel
treatment they must obviously expect if they fell into the hand of an
usurper or stranger.

The brother of Betwudet Tamerté, who, with the six others, had been
murdered before Oustas’s tent, was, at this time, guardian of the
mountain of Wechné. His brother’s death, however, and the unsettled
state of government, had so much weakened both his authority and
attention, that he either did not choose, or was not able, to prevent
the escape of these princes, all flying for their lives, and for the
sake of preserving the ancient constitution of their country. And that
this, and no other was their object, appeared the instant the danger
was removed; for, as soon as the news that David was proclaimed at
Gondar arrived at the mountain, all the princes returned of their own
accord, excepting Bacuffa, younger brother to the king, who fled to the
Galla, and lay concealed among them for a time.

On David’s arrival at Gondar, all the old misfortunes seemed to be
forgotten. The joy of having the ancient royal line restored, got the
better of those fears which first occasioned the interruption. The
prisons were thrown open, and David was crowned the 30th of January
1714, amidst the acclamations of all ranks of people, and every
demonstration of festivity and joy.

David was son of Yasous the Great, and consequently brother to the
parricide Tecla Haimanout, but by another mother. At his coronation he
was just twenty-one years of age, and took for his inauguration name
Adebar Segued.

In all this time, however, Oustas was alive. Oustas was, indeed, sick,
but still he was king; and yet it is surprising that David had been now
nine days at Gondar, and no injury had been offered to Oustas, nor any
escape attempted for him by his friends.

It was the 6th of February, the day before Lent, when, the king
sent the Abuna Marcus, Itchegué Za Michael, with some of the great
officers of state, to interrogate Oustas judicially, for form’s sake,
as to his title to the crown. The questions proposed are very short
and simple--“Who are you? What brought you here?” To these plain
interrogatories, Oustas, then struggling with death, answered, however,
as plainly, and without equivocation, “Tell my king David, that true it
is I have made myself king, as much as one can be that is not of the
royal family; for I am but a private man, son of a subject, Kasmati
Delba Yasous: all I beg of the king is to give me a little time, and
let me die with sickness, as I shortly shall, without putting me to
torment or pain.”

On the 10th day of February, that is four days after the interrogation,
Oustas died, but whether of a violent or natural death is not known.
The historian of his reign, a cotemporary writer, says, some reported
that he died of an amputation of his leg by order of the king; others,
that he was strangled; but that most people were of opinion that he
died of sickness; and this I think the most probable, for had the king
been earnestly set upon his death, he would not have allowed so much
time to pass, after his coronation, before his rival was interrogated;
nor was there any reason to allow him four days after his confession.
David’s moderation after the death, moreover, seems to render this
still more credible; for he ordered his body to be buried in the church
of the Nativity, which he had himself built, with all the honours and
public ceremonies due to his rank as a nobleman and subject, who had
been guilty of no crime, instead of ordering his body to be hewn in
pieces, and scattered along the ground without burial, to be eat by
the dogs; the invariable punishment, unless in this one instance, of
high-treason in this country.

Posterity, regarding his merit more than his title, have, however, kept
his name still among the list of kings; and tradition, doing him more
justice still than history, has ranked him among the best that ever
reigned in Abyssinia.

[Illustration]




DAVID IV.

From 1714 to 1719.

    _Convocation of the Clergy--Catholic Priests executed--A
    second Convocation--Clergy insult the King--His severe
    Punishment--King dies of Poison._


The moderation of the king, both before and after the death of Oustas,
and perhaps some other favourable appearances now unknown to us, set
the monks, the constant pryers into futurity, upon prophecying that the
reign of this prince was to be equal in length to that of his father
Yasous the Great, and that it was to be peaceable, full of justice and
moderation, without execution, or effusion of civil blood.

David, immediately upon his accession, appointed Fit-Auraris Agnè,
Ozoro Keduste’s brother[89], his Betwudet, and Abra Hezekias his
matter of the household; and was proceeding to fill up the inferior
posts of government, when he was interrupted by the clamours of a
multitude of monks demanding a convocation of the clergy.

These assemblies, however often solicited, are never called in
the reign of vigorous princes, but by the special order of the
sovereign, who grants or refuses them purely from his own free-will.
They are, however, particularly expected at the accession of a new
prince, upon any apprehension of heresy, or any novelty or abuse in
church-government.

The arrival of a new-Abuna from Egypt is also a very principal reason
for the convocation. These assemblies are very numerous. Many of the
most discreet members of the church absent themselves purposely. On
the other hand, the monks, who, by vows, have bound themselves to the
most painful austerities and sufferings; those that devote themselves
to pass their lives in the deep and unwholesome valleys of the country;
hermits that starve on the points of cold rocks; others that live in
deserts surrounded with, and perpetually exposed to wild beasts; in
a word, the whole tribe of fanatics, false prophets, diviners, and
dreamers, people who affect to see and foreknow what is in future
to happen, by living in perfect ignorance of what is passing at the
present; people in constant habits of dirt and nastiness, naked, or
covered with hair; in short, a collection of monsters, scarcely to
be described or conceived, compose an ecclesiastical assembly in
Abyssinia, and are the leaders of an ignorant and furious populace,
who adore them as saints, and are always ready to support them in some
violation of the laws of the country, or of humanity, to which, by
their customs and manner of life, their very first appearance shews
they have been long strangers.

David, however averse to these assemblies, could not decently refuse
them, now a new prince was set on the throne, a new Abuna was come
from Egypt, and a complaint was ready to be brought that the church
was in danger. The assembly met in the usual place before the palace.
The Itchegué, or head of the monks of Debra Libanos, was ready with a
complaint, which he preferred to the king. He stated it was notorious,
but offered to prove it if denied, that three Romish priests, with an
Abyssinian for their interpreter, were then established in Walkayt,
and, for several years, had been there maintained, protected, and
consulted by the late king Oustas, who had often assisted at the
celebration of mass as solemnized by the church of Rome.

David was a rigid adherent to the church of Alexandria, and educated
by his mother in the tenets of the monks of Saint Eustathius, that is,
the most declared enemies of every thing approaching to the tenets of
the church of Rome. He was consequently, not by inclination, neither
was he by duty, obliged to undertake the defence of measures adopted by
Oustas, of which he was besides ignorant, having been confined in the
mountain of Wechné. He ordered, therefore, the missionaries, and their
interpreter, whose name was Abba Gregorius, to be apprehended.

These unfortunate people were accordingly produced before the most
prejudiced and partial of all tribunals. Abba Masmarè and Adug Tesfo
were adduced to interrogate and to interpret to them, as they
understood the Arabic, having been at Cairo and Jerusalem. The trial
neither was, nor was intended to be long. The first question put was
a very direct one; Do you, or do you not, receive the council of
Chalcedon as a rule of faith? and, Do you believe that Leo the pope
lawfully and regularly presided at it, and conducted it? To this the
prisoners plainly answered, That they looked upon the council of
Chalcedon as the fourth general council, and received it as such,
and as a rule of faith: that they did believe pope Leo lawfully and
regularly presided at it, as being head of the Catholic church,
successor to St Peter, and Christ’s vicar upon earth. Upon this a
general shout was heard from the whole assembly; and the fatal cry,
“Stone them.”--“Whoever throws not three stones, he is accursed, and an
enemy to Mary,” immediately followed.

One priest only, distinguished for piety and learning among his
countrymen, and one of the chief men in the assembly, with great
vehemence declared, they were tried partially and unfairly, and
condemned unjustly. But his voice was not heard amidst the clamours
of such a multitude; and the monks were accordingly by the judges
condemned to die. Ropes were instantly thrown about their necks, and
they were dragged to a place behind the church of Abbo, in the way to
Tedda, where they were, according to their sentence, stoned to death,
suffering with a patience and resignation equal to the first martyrs.

The justice, however, which we owe to the memory of the deceased M. du
Roule, must always leave a fear in every Christian mind, that, spotted
as these missionaries were with the horrid crime of the premeditated,
unprovoked murder of that ambassador, the indifference they testified
at the approach, and in the immediate suffering of death, had its
origin rather in hardness of heart than in the quietness of their
consciences. Many fanatics have been known to die, glorying in having
perpetrated the most horrid crimes to which the sentence of eternal
damnation is certainly annexed in the book before them.

I have often, both on purpose and by accident, passed by this place,
where three large, and one small pile of stones, cover the bodies of
these unfortunate sufferers; and, with many heavy reflections, upon
my own danger, I have often wondered how these three priests, of
whatever nation they were, passed unnoticed among the number of their
fraternity, whose memory is honoured with long panegyrics by the Romish
writers of those times, as destined one day to appear in the kalendar.
Though those that compose the long list of Tellez died with piety
and resignation, they were surely guilty in the way they almost all
were engaged, contrary to the laws and constitution of the country,
in actions and designs that can be fairly qualified by no other name
than that of treason, while no such political meddling out of their
profession ever was reproached to these three, even by their enemies.

Tellez says not a word of them; Le Grande, a zealous Catholic writer
of these times, but little; though he publishes an Arabic letter to
consul Maillet, which mentions their names, their sufferings, and other
circumstances attending them. I shall, therefore, take the liberty of
offering my conjecture, as I think this silence, or the suppression of
a fact, gives me a title to do; but shall first produce the letter of
Elias Enoch, upon which I found my judgment.


TRANSLATION _of an_ ARABIC LETTER _wrote to_ M. DE MAILLET.

“After having assured M. de Maillet, the consul, of my respects, and
of the continuation of my prayers for his health, as being a gentleman
venerable for his merits, distinguished by his knowledge and great
penetration, of a noble birth, always beneficent, and addicted to
pious actions, (may God preserve his life to that degree of honour due
to so respectable a person), I now write you from the town of Mocha.
I left Abyssinia in the year 1718, and came to this town of Mocha in
extreme poverty, or rather absolutely destitute. God has assisted me:
I give praise to him for his bounty, and always remain much obliged to
you. What follows is all that I can inform you as touching the news of
Abyssinia. King Yasous is long since dead: his son, Tecla Haimanout,
having seized upon the kingdom by force, caused his father to be
assassinated. This king Yasous, having given me leave to go to Sennaar,
furnished me with a letter addressed to the king there, in which he
desired him to put no obstacles in the way of du Roule the French
ambassador’s journey, but to suffer him to enter Ethiopia. He also gave
me another letter addressed to the basha and officers of Grand Cairo;
and another letter to the ambassador himself, by which he signified
to him that he might enter into Ethiopia without fear. Accordingly I
had departed with these letters for Sennaar; but king Tecla Haimanout,
son of king Yasous, having taken possession of the kingdom while I was
yet in Abyssinia, I returned and delivered to him the letters which
had been given me by his father. It was now three months since Tecla
Haimanout had been upon the throne; he approved of the letters, and
caused them to be transcribed in his own name; and ordered me to go and
join du Roule the ambassador, and accompany him back again to Gondar.
King Yasous had already sent an officer to meet the ambassador at
Sennaar; and he had been gone six months without my knowledge; but that
officer, having trifled away his time in trading, did not enter Sennaar
till that king had caused the ambassador to be murdered, together with
those that were with him. As for me, not knowing what had happened,
I was advancing with the orders of Tecla Haimanout, when, being now
within three days journey of Sennaar, I heard of the ambassador’s
death, and that of his companions; and being terrified at this, I
returned into Abyssinia to let Tecla Haimanout know what the king of
Sennaar had done. Immediately upon hearing of this, Tecla Haimanout
formed a resolution to declare war against the king of Sennaar, but was
soon after slain in a mutiny of the soldiers. He reigned two years.
Tifilis, brother of Yasous, succeeded him, and reigned three years and
three months. Oustas, nephew of king Yasous, succeeded Tifilis, and
usurped the kingdom, of which he was actually prime minister, being
son of a sister of Yasous. Oustas was dethroned, and died soon after.
David, son of Yasous, succeeded him, and reigned five years and five
months. The _friars_, who arrived in Ethiopia in the reign of Oustas,
were stoned to death, upon the succession of David to the throne, by
those that were of the party of David. A son of _Michael_, whom he
had by a slave, aged only six years, was stoned with him. It was the
_fourth_ son he had. I made Yasous believe that the religion of the
French was the same with that of Ethiopia,” &c. &c.

From this letter, we see a boy of six years old, son of one of these
priests or friars, was stoned to death with them; and his heap of
stones appears with those of the others. It was, indeed, a common
test of the people suspected to be priests, who stole into Abyssinia,
to offer them women, their vows being known, and that they could not
marry. I apprehend, to avoid detection, one at least of them had
broken his vow of celibacy and chastity, and that this child was the
consequence, but not the only one, as Enoch says, in his letter, he had
three others; and this probably was the reason why the Catholics of
those times had consigned their merit to oblivion, rather than record
it with their failings.

For although we know that there were friars who had been in Ethiopia
since the time of Oustas, we should not have been informed who they
were, had it not been for a small sheet, published at Rome in the year
1774, by a capuchin priest called Theodosius Volpi, sent to me by my
learned and worthy friend the honourable Daines Barrington. From this
we find, that these three were, Liberato de Wies, apostolical prefect
in Austria; Michael Pius of Zerbe, in the province of Padua; and Samuel
de Beumo, of the Milanese. The account of their death is the same as
already given, though the publisher suppresses the stoning of the
child, and the existence of the three other, fruits of the seraphic
mission, through the endeavours of father Michael Pius of Zerbe, of the
province of Milan. The child, too, stoned to death with his father,
was six years old, and was, as Elias says, fourth son of Michael;
and it was in 1714 this catastrophe happened, so that this will bring
these fathers entrance into Nubia about the time of the murder of M. du
Roule: so consistent with every crime is fanaticism and false religion.

The barbarous monks, gratified in the first instance, would not be
contented without extending their vengeance to Abba Gregorius, the
Abyssinian priest, the interpreter. But David, who found upon trial
that, in going to attend the priests in Walkayt, he had only obeyed the
express command of Oustas, then his sovereign, absolutely refused to
suffer him to be either tried or punished, but dismissed him, without
further censure or question, to his native country.

While David was thus employed at Gondar, news were brought to him
that his brother Bacuffa had left the Galla, and was then in a small
town in Begemder, called Wetan. It was this prince who, together with
fifty others of the royal family, were let down from the mountain of
Wechné, upon Oustas’s son being proposed, and he alone refused to
return upon his brother’s accession to the throne. David sent Azaleffi,
Guebra Mehedin, and Badjerund Welled de l’Oul, to Wetan, where they
apprehended Bacuffa by surprise, and lodged him in the mountain of
Wechné, after having cut off a very small part of the tip of his nose,
which was scarcely discernible when he came to the throne.

Kasmati Georgis, had been banished to the mountain in the reign of the
late king, where he had contracted an intimate friendship with David.
He had also married a sister of Ozoro Mamet, by whom Yasous had several
children, particularly one Welleta Georgis, a prince then of years
to govern, and confined to the mountain. David, on his coming to the
throne, did not forget his old friendship on the mountain; and, passing
by Emfras, he sent to Wechné to bring down Kasmati Georgis to Arringo,
one of the king’s palaces in Begemder, where he intended to pass the
summer. On his return he gave him the government of Gojam; and his
favourite Agné, his uncle, dying at this time, very much regretted,
Georgis was also created Betwudet in his place.

This year Abuna Marcus died; and his successor, Abuna Christodulus,
arriving the third day of November, this made the calling of another
assembly of the clergy absolutely necessary, although, from the humour
the last was in, the whole time of their meeting, the king was very
little inclined to it.

The monks in Abyssinia, as I have often said, are divided into two
bodies, those of Debra Libanos and those of Abba Eustathius. Some have
imagined that the difference between these two bodies arises from a
dispute about two natures in Christ. But this is from misinformation;
for, were a dispute to arise about the two natures in Christ, each
party would declare the other a heretic; but at present a few equivocal
words, used to define the mode and moment of our Saviour’s incarnation,
though neither opinion is thought heretical[90], have the effect to
make these two sects enemies all their lives.

The Abuna is the head of the Abyssinian church; yet, as he is known to
be a slave of the Mahometans, upon his first arrival, and permission
obtained from the king, the assembly meets in a large outer court,
or square, before the palace, where he is interrogated, and where he
declares which of the two opinions he adopts. If he has been properly
advised, he declares for the ruling and strongest party; though
sometimes he is determined, by the address of those about him, to side
with the weakest; and very often, if he has had no instruction on his
arrival, he does not know what this reference means; for no trace of
such dispute exists among his brethren in Cairo, from whence he came.
He is, moreover, a stranger to the language, and the words containing
either opinion, which, for shortness sake, are made to mean a great
deal more than they at first seem to import; and, whether freely or
literally translated, are equally unintelligible to a foreigner. After
the Abuna has declared his choice, this is announced by beat of drum to
the people, and is called _Nagar Haimanout_, or, the Proclamation of
the Faith. The only ordinary effect this declaration has, is to make
the person who is at the head of one party an adversary to him who is
the head of the other, all his life after.

The king at his accession makes his declaration also. The clergy
maintain, that he should do this in an assembly called for that
purpose, though the king denies that there is any necessity for
the clergy to be present; but he considers it as his privilege to
choose his own time and place, and announces it to the people, by
proclamation, at what time, and in what manner, he thinks most
convenient.

Although David had given his permission to assemble the clergy to hear
the Abuna’s declaration, he did not think himself bound to assist at
it, and, therefore, he sent to the monks of Debra Libanos, and those of
Abba Eustathius, to go to the Abuna with Betwudet Georgis, who should
interrogate the Abuna, and report the answer to the king, who thereupon
would order it to be proclaimed to the people. The monks of Debra
Libanos refused this, as they did not consider Georgis as indifferent,
being known to be a staunch Eustathian. They declared, therefore, they
would neither hear nor regard what the Abuna said, unless it was in
the king’s presence; and this was just what David was resolved not to
humour them in.

Betwudet Georgis, the great officers of state, and most of the people
of consideration about Gondar, waited upon the Abuna as the king had
commanded; and the Betwudet having desired him to make his profession,
he would only give this evasive answer, That his faith was in all
respects the same as that of Abba Marcos and Abba Sanuda, the ancient
and orthodox Abunas.

This answer left every party at liberty to imagine that the Abuna was
their own. But this evasion did not content the king, who therefore
ordered the Betwudet, without taking further notice of the Abuna, to
make proclamation in terms of the profession of the monks of Abba
Eustathius. This occasioned great heats among the monks of Debra
Libanos. They ran all with one accord to the Itchegué’s house, for he
is their general, or chief of their convent, and here they came to
the most violent resolutions, declaring that they would die either
together, or man by man, in support of their privileges and the
freedom of their assemblies. From the Itchegué’s house they ran to
the Abuna’s, without soliciting or receiving any permission from the
king; and, upon interrogation, they succeeded with the Abuna to the
height of their wishes; for he answered in the precise words of their
profession--“One God, of the Father alone, united to a body perfectly
human, consubstantial with ours, and by that union becoming the
Messiah;” in direct opposition to what was proclaimed by the king’s
order at the gate of the palace the day before--Perfect God and perfect
man, by the union one Christ, whose body is composed of a precious
substance, called _Bahery_, not consubstantial with ours, or derived
from his mother.

Had they stopt here it had been well; but the victory was too great,
too unexpected, and complete, to admit of their sitting quietly down
without a triumph. They returned, therefore, from the Abuna’s, frantic
with joy, shouting, and singing, and more peculiarly one kind of song,
or hallelujah, used always upon victories obtained over infidels. As
they passed the door of the king’s palace, some of the officers of
the household, Azage Zakery, Azage Tecla Haimanout, and Badjerund
Welleta David, moderate men, lovers of peace, and inclined to no party,
endeavoured to persuade them to content themselves with what they
had done, to disperse, and each go to his home, before some mischief
overtook them. But they were too high-minded. They redoubled their
songs; and, in this manner, again assembled in the Itchegué’s house to
deliberate on what further they were to attempt; when one of the monks,
a prophet, or dreamer, declared, “That God had opened his eyes, and
that he then saw a cherub with a flaming sword guarding the Itchegué’s
gate:” with such a centinel they concluded that they were perfectly
safe from any attempts of man.

In the mean time, however, the king was violently affected at the
seditious behaviour of the monks; nor did he hesitate a moment in
what manner he was to punish it. As they had employed the song which
was sung only for victories obtained over infidels, by which they
meant to allude particularly to the king, he detached a body of Pagan
Galla to punish them; having surrounded the Itchegué’s house, where
the monks were assembled, they forced open the gate, (and the cherub
with the flaming sword not interfering) they fell, sword in hand, upon
the unarmed priests, and in an instant laid above a hundred of the
principal of them dead upon the floor. They then sallied out with their
bloody weapons into the street, and hewed to pieces those that attended
the procession, and who were still diverting themselves with their
song. Gondar now appeared like a town taken by storm; every street was
covered with the dead, and dying; and this massacre continued till next
day at noon, when, by proclamation, the king ordered it to cease.

David, now satisfied as to the priests, thought he owed to the Abuna
a mortification for his double-dealing. He sent, therefore, the
soldiers to take him out of his house, and bring him to the gate of
the palace, where the poor wretch, half dead with fear, expected every
moment to fall by the bloody hands of the Djawi. Having enjoyed his
panic some time, the king ordered him to be placed close beside the
kettle-drum, and a profession of faith was made in the royal presence,
and announced by beat of drum to the people, agreeing in every respect
to that published the first day by Betwudet Georgis, and directly
contradicting what he had said with his own mouth to the monks of Debra
Libanos, which was the occasion of the riot.

This bloody, indiscriminate massacre had comprehended too many men
of worth and distinction not to occasion great discontent among the
principal people both within and without the palace. Conspiracies
against the king were now everywhere openly talked of, the fruits of
which soon appeared. David fell sick, and those about him endeavoured
to persuade him that it was the remains of an injury which he had
lately received from a fall off his horse. But, upon the meeting of a
council on the 9th of March 1719, it was discovered and proved, that
Kasmati Laté and Ras Georgis had employed Kutcho, keeper of the palace,
to give a strong poison to the king, which he had taken that morning
from the hands of a Mahometan. Ras Georgis was then brought before the
council, and scarcely denied the fact; upon which his only son was
ordered to be hewn to pieces before his face, and immediately after the
father’s eyes were pulled out. Kutcho, keeper of the palace, and the
Mahometan who gave the poison, were hewn to pieces with swords before
the gate of the palace, and their mangled bodies thrown to the dogs.
The king died that evening in great agony.

The king’s favourite, Betwudet Georgis, found himself now in a most
dangerous situation. David his protector was dead, and he was left now
alone to answer for those bloody measures of which he was universally
believed to be the adviser. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, if
possible, to secure a successor of David’s own family, who might stop
the prosecutions against him for steps the king had adopted as his own,
and as such had carried into execution.

We have already observed, that, when banished to the mountain of Wechné
by Oustas, he had contracted there, first a friendship with David,
and, at the same time, with another prince, Ayto Welled Georgis, who
was son to Yasous by Ozoro Mamet, whose sister Georgis had married,
and consequently was uncle to Ayto Welleta Georgis, as having married
his aunt, sister to Ozoro Mamet. When this prince now arrived at
manhood, he knew himself perfectly secure; and, therefore, a number
of the men in power being then assembled at his house, he lost no
time, but surrounded it with a body of soldiers. He proposed to them
Welled Georgis as immediate successor to David. The people present,
seeing themselves in the soldiers hands, and convinced from the
recent examples, that Georgis was not very tender in the use of them,
in appearance chearfully, and without hesitation, approved of the
Betwudet’s choice; and Lika Jonathan, one of the chief civil judges,
performed the office of crier, proclaiming with an audible voice,
“Ayto Welled Georgis, brother to our late king David, son of our great
king Yasous, he is now our king. Mourn for the king that is dead, but
rejoice with the king that is alive.” This is the ordinary stile of
the proclamation. Mutual congratulations and promises passed among the
members of the meeting, but with very different resolutions.

All the company, escorted by a body of archers, and another of
fuzileers, with Betwudet Georgis at their head, repaired to the great
place before the palace to make the same proclamation by beat of drum
that they had done in the Betwudet’s house. They found the drum ready,
and the whole body of the king’s household troops under arms, and
drawn up before it. Upon the sight of their companions, the soldiers
left the Betwudet, and fell into a proper place reserved vacant for
them by their brethren. Without loss of time the drum was beat, and a
proclamation made, “Bacuffa, son of Yasous, is our king! Mourn for the
dead, and rejoice with the living.” Loud acclamations from the people
were echoed back again by the soldiers, and Bacuffa’s name was received
with universal acclamations. Some of the principal people then went
to the council-chamber, and sent proper officers, with a good body of
troops, to escort the king from Wechné.

Upon their arrival they found the sentiments of the princes upon the
election were widely different from those testified by the people.
They all to a man declared their dissent from that election. They
upbraided Bacuffa for his brutal manners; for his violent, unsociable,
unrelenting temper, from the which, they said, they had the cruelest
consequences to apprehend; and, indeed, it was not without great reason
that they made these remonstrances; for Bacuffa, when he escaped from
the mountain, fled for refuge among the Galla, and received there
a very strong tincture of the savage manners of that nation, which
neither those of Gondar nor the army could have an opportunity to judge
of. Resolute, active, and politic, he was very well formed to hold
the reins of government in unsettled times; but his temper of itself
exceedingly suspicious, and the little regard he had for the life of
man, made his whole reign (as it was feared) one continued tragedy. So
that, notwithstanding the goodness of his understanding, and many acts
of wisdom and justice, he is considered as a bloody, merciless tyrant,
and his memory regarded with the greatest detestation.

On the first news of the insurrection of the princes on Wechné, Kasmati
Amha Yasous, governor of Begemder, marched with his whole force and
encamped under the mountain. He then received Bacuffa, as king, having
rescued him from the hands of his relations; and, in order to obviate,
as much as possible, any future trouble, he obliged the different
branches of the royal family to a reconciliation with each other,
making Bacuffa, on the one side, swear that he was not to remember nor
revenge any injury or affront received upon the mountain; and them on
the mountain swear also, that they would forget all old disagreements,
consider Bacuffa as their king, and not create him any trouble in his
reign by escapes, or other rebellious practices.

As it was then night, Bacuffa staid in the house of Azage Assarat,
and the next morning came to Serbraxos, whence he sent to the monks
of Tedda to meet him there. From Tedda he proceeded to Gondar, where
he was met by the Abuna and Itchegué amidst the acclamations of a
prodigious number of people.

[Illustration]




BACUFFA.

From 1719 to 1729.

    _Bloody Reign--Exterminates the Conspirators--Counterfeits
    Death--Becomes very popular._


Honest men, who loved their country, saw the dangerous situation it was
then in. Every day had produced instances of a growing indifference to
that form of government which, from the earliest times, they had looked
upon as sacred; and upon every slight and unreasonable disgust a person
of consequence thought he had met with, a party was immediately formed,
and nothing less was agreed on than directly imbruing their hands in
the blood of their sovereign.

A prince was necessary who had qualities of mind proper to enable him
to put a stop to these enormities before they involved the state in
one scene of anarchy and ruin. Bacuffa was thought to answer these
expectations; and, in the end, he was found to exceed them. Silent,
secret, and unfathomable in his designs, surrounded by soldiers
who were his own slaves, and by new men of his own creation, he
removed those tyrants who opposed their sovereigns upon the smallest
provocation. Conspiracy followed conspiracy, and rebellion; but all
were defeated, as soon as they had birth, by the superior activity and
address of the king.

I have said he was called Bacuffa by the Galla; but, in compliance
with the custom of Abyssinia, already mentioned, he had assumed still
two other names, which were, Atzham Georgis, his name of baptism, and
Adebar Segued, which means “reverenced by the towns or inhabited places
of the country,” given him at his inauguration. As for that of Bacuffa,
which meant the _inexorable_, it was the less dishonourable from having
been given him by impartial strangers from their own observation while
he was yet in private life; his whole conduct afterwards shewed how
justly.

The king has near his person an officer who is meant to be his
historiographer. He is also keeper of his seal, and is obliged to make
a journal of the king’s actions, good or bad, without comment of his
own upon them. This, when the king dies, or at least soon after, is
delivered to the council, who read it over, and erase every thing false
in it; whilst they supply any material fact that may have been omitted,
whether purposely or not. This would have been a very dangerous book
to have been kept in Bacuffa’s time; and, accordingly, no person chose
ever to run that risk; and the king’s particular behaviour afterwards
had still the further effect, that nobody would supply this deficiency
after his death, a general belief prevailing in Abyssinia that he is
alive to this day, and will appear again in all his terrors. It is
owing to this circumstance that we have nothing complete of this king’s
reign; only a few anecdotes are preserved, some of them very odd ones.
I shall only, for the present, choose such of those as lead me to the
subject I have in hand.

Bacuffa was exceedingly fond of divinations, dreams, and prophecies,
so are all the Abyssinians; but he imbibed an additional propensity
to these, among the Pagans to whom he had fled. One day, when walking
alone, he perceived a priest exceedingly attentive in observing the
forms that little pieces of straw, cut to certain lengths, made upon a
pool of water into which ran a small stream. From the combination of
these in letters, or figures, as they chanced to fall, an answer is
procured to the doubt proposed, which, if you believe these idlers, is
perfectly infallible.

Bacuffa in disguise, dressed like a poor man, is said to have asked the
priest after what he was inquiring. The priest answered, He was trying
whether the king would have a son, and who should govern the kingdom
after him. The king abode the investigation patiently; and the answer
was, That he should have a son; but that a Welleta Georgis should
govern the kingdom after him for thirty years, though that Welleta
Georgis should be neither his son nor any descendant of his. Full of
thought at this untoward prediction, he harboured it in his breast
without communicating it to any one, and resolved to blast the hopes
of every Welleta Georgis that should be so unfortunate as to stand
within the possibility of reigning after him. Many innocent people of
different parts disappeared from this unknown crime; and eleven princes
on the mountain of Wechné, some say more, lost their lives for a name
that is very common in Abyssinia, without one overt act of treason,
or even a suspicion of what they were accused. A panic now struck all
ranks of people, without terminating in any scheme of resistance;
which sufficiently shewed that the king had succeeded in dissolving
all confederacies among his subjects, and destroying radically that
rebellious spirit which had operated so fatally in the last reigns.

It is a custom among the kings of Abyssinia, especially in intervals
of peace, to disappear for a time, without any warning. Sometimes,
indeed, one or two confidential servants, pretending to be busied in
other affairs, attend at a distance, and keep their eye upon him,
while, disguised in different manners, he goes like a stranger to those
parts he intends to visit. In one of these private journeys, passing
into Kuara, a province on the N. E. of Abyssinia, near the confines of
Sennaar, Bacuffa happened, or counterfeited, to be seized by a fever,
a common disease of that unwholesome country. He was then in a poor
village belonging to servants of a man of distinction, whose house was
on the top of the hill immediately above, in temperate and wholesome
air. The hospitable landlord, upon the first hearing of the distress
of a stranger, immediately removed him up to his house, where every
attention that could be suggested by a charitable mind was bestowed
upon his diseased guest, who presently recovered his former state of
health, but not till the kind assistance and unwearied diligence of the
beautiful daughter of the house had made the deepest impression upon
him, and laid him under the greatest obligations.

The family consisted of five young men in the flower of their youth,
and one daughter, whose name was Berhan Magass, _the Glory of
Grace_, exceedingly beautiful, gentle, mild, and affable; of great
understanding and prudence beyond her age; the darling, not only of her
own family, but of all the neighbourhood.

Bacuffa recovering his health, returned speedily to the palace, which
he entered privately at night, and appeared early next morning sitting
in judgment, and hearing causes, which, with these princes, is the
first public occupation of the day.

A messenger, with guards and attendants, was immediately sent to
Kuara, and Berhan Magass hurried from her father’s house, she knew not
why, but her surprise was carried to the utmost, by being presented
and married to the king, no reply, condition, or stipulation being
suffered. She gained, however, and preserved his confidence as long
as he lived: not that Bacuffa valued himself upon constancy to one
wife, more than the rest of his predecessors had done. He had, indeed,
many mistresses, but with these he observed a very singular rule; he
never took to his bed any one woman whatever, the fair Berhan Magass
excepted, without her having been first so far intoxicated with wine or
spirits as not to remember any thing that passed in conversation.

While Bacuffa was on his concealed journey to Kuara, a very dangerous
conspiracy was forming at Gondar, under the immediate conduct of Ozoro
Welleta Raphael, the king’s sister, a very ambitious woman, and of
an unquiet, enterprising temper. Disgusted by her brother’s refusal
of a gift of some crown lands which were then vacant, and without
any owners, she thought no vengeance adequate to the affront, but
dethroning Bacuffa. With this view she engaged several men of power in
her interest, and particularly the black servants of the palace who
attend immediately upon the king’s person, and were to seize upon, or
destroy him, the moment he returned. This plot, in all its particulars,
was conveyed to the king.

There was an old, abandoned house of king Yasous, at Bartcho, about a
day’s journey south of Gondar; it stands on a very extensive plain.
The king intending, as he said, to repair, or rather clean and prepare
this house for his immediate reception, ordered all the black slaves
from Gondar thither for that purpose, together with some of their
ringleaders. Kasmati Waragna, in the mean time, was ordered to bring a
thousand horsemen of his Galla Djawi. He arrived at Bartcho nearly at
the same time with the black servants, who being unarmed, as suspecting
nothing, and on foot, after a sharp reproof from the king, were all
surrounded and cut to pieces by the hands of Waragna, and orders were
immediately sent to Gondar to extirpate the remainder there; and this
execution laid a foundation for a feud that endures to this day between
the Galla troops and the black horse, who were then abolished, as the
Galla have been since, though both were part of the king’s household
formerly, before David’s or Bacuffa’s time. As for Welleta Raphael,
she was seized that same night, and was conveyed to Walkayt, to be
confined there, with private instructions, however, to put her to death
speedily, which were executed accordingly.

The queen had a son within the year, whom the council named Yasous,
after his grandfather, whose memory will ever be dear in Abyssinia; and
this again revived the old apprehensions that Welleta Georgis was to
govern the country (as the prophet said) for thirty years. Tormented
with this idea, rather than the havoc it had occasioned, he devised
with himself a scheme which he thought would certainly detect this
future usurper of his crown and dethroner of his child. But first he
directed that the queen should be crowned, a ceremony that carries
great consequences along with it when solemnized properly, as at that
time she is made regent, or Iteghè, in all minorities that may happen
afterwards.

After he had created his wife Iteghè, Bacuffa pretended to be sick:
several days passed without hopes of recovery; but at last the news
of the king’s death were published in Gondar. The joy was so great,
and so universal, that nobody attempted to conceal it. Every one found
himself eased of a load of fear which had become insupportable. Several
princes escaped from the mountain of Wechné to put themselves in the
way of being chosen; some were sent to by those great men who thought
themselves capable of effecting the nomination, and a speedy day was
appointed for the burial of the king’s corpse, when Bacuffa appeared,
in the ordinary seat of justice, early in the morning of that day,
with the Iteghè, and the infant Yasous, his son, sitting in a chair
below him.

There was no occasion to accuse the guilty. The whole court, and all
strangers attending there upon business, fled, and spread an universal
terror through the whole streets of Gondar. All ranks of people were
driven to despair, for all had rejoiced; and much less crimes had been
before punished with death. What this sedition would have ended in, it
is hard to know, had it not been for the immediate resolution of the
king, who ordered a general pardon and amnesty to be proclaimed at the
door of the palace.

There are two kettle-drums of a large size placed one on each side of
the outer gate of the king’s house. They are called the _lion_ and
the _lamb_. The lion is beat at the proclamations which regard war,
attainders for conspiracies and rebellions, promotions to supreme
commands, and suchlike high matters. The lamb[91] is heard only on
beneficent, pacific occasions, of gifts from the crown, of general
amnesties, of private pardons, and reversals of penal ordinances. The
whole town was in expectation of some sanguinary decree, when, to
their utter surprise, they heard the voice of the lamb, a certain sign
of peace and forgivenness; and speedily followed by a proclamation,
forbidding people of all degrees to leave their houses, that the king’s
word was pledged for every one’s security; and that all the principal
men should immediately attend him within the palace, in a public place
which is called the Ashoa, and that upon pain of rebellion.

The king appeared cloathed all in white, being the habit of peace; his
head was bare, dressed, anointed, and perfumed, and his face uncovered.
He thus advanced to the rail of the gallery, about 10 feet above the
heads of the audience, and, in a very graceful, composed, but resolute
manner, began a short oration to the people. “He put them in mind of
their wantonness in having made Oustas, a man not of the royal line
of Solomon, king of Abyssinia; of their having incited his brother,
Tecla Haimanout, to assassinate their father Yasous; that they had
afterwards murdered Tecla Haimanout himself, one brother, and lately
his other brother David, his own immediate predecessor: That he had
taken due vengeance upon all the ringleaders of those crimes, as
was the duty of his place, and, if much blood had been shed, it was
because many enormities had been committed; but that knowing now that
order was established, and conspiracies extinguished among them, he
had counterfeited death, to signify an end was put to Bacuffa and his
bloody measures; that he now was risen again, and appeared to them by
the name of Atzham Georgis, son of Yasous the Great; and ordered every
man home to his house to rejoice at the accession of a new king, under
whom they should have justice, and live without fear, as long as they
respected the king that God had anointed over them.”

This speech was followed by the loudest acclamations, “Long live
Bacuffa! Long live Atzham Georgis!” It was well known that this king
never failed in his word, or any way prevaricated in his promises.
Every one, therefore, went home in as perfect peace as if war had never
been among them; and Bacuffa’s delicacy in this respect was seen a few
days after; for Hannes his brother having been brought clandestinely
from Wechné by Kasmati Georgis, a nobleman of great consequence,
they were both taken by the governor of Wechné and sent in chains to
the king. The ordinary process would have been to put them instantly
to death, as being apprehended in the very highest act of treason;
nor would this have alarmed any person whatever, or been thought an
infraction of the king’s late promise. Bacuffa, however, was of another
mind. He sent the criminal judges, who ordinarily sit upon capital
crimes, to meet the two prisoners in their way to Gondar, and carried
them back to the foot of the mountain of Wechné to have their crimes
proved, and to be tried there out of his presence and influence, where
they were both condemned, Hannes to have an arm cut off, Georgis to be
sent to prison to the governor of Walkayt, with private orders to put
him to death; both which sentences were executed, though Hannes so far
recovered that he was king of Abyssinia in my time, notwithstanding
this mutilation; but it was a direct violation of the laws of the land.

It is said that a discovery, which happened in the king’s feigned
illness, promoted this sudden revolution of manners. In one of his
secret tours through Begemder, (after Tigré, the most powerful province
in Abyssinia, and by much the most plentiful) being disguised like a
poor man, dirty and fatigued with the length of the way and heat of
the weather, he came to the house of a private person, not very rich,
indeed, but of noble manners and carriage, and who, by the justice and
mildness of his behaviour and customs, had acquired a great degree of
influence among his neighbours. The father was old and feeble, but the
son in the vigour of his age, who was then standing in a large pool of
water, at his father’s door, washing his own cotton cloak, or wrapper,
which is their upper garment; an occupation below no young man in
Abyssinia.

Bacuffa, as overcome with heat, threw himself down under the shade of
a tree, and, in a faint voice and foreign dialect, intreated the young
man to wash his cloak likewise, after having finished his own. The
young man consented most willingly; and, throwing by his own garment,
fell to washing the stranger’s with great diligence and attention.
In the mean time, Bacuffa began questioning him about the king, and
what his opinion was of him. The young man answered, he had never
formed any. Bacuffa, however, still plied him with questions, while he
continued washing the cloak, without giving him any answer at all; at
last, being able to hold out no longer, he gathered Bacuffa’s cloak in
his arms, wet as it was, and threw it to him: “I thought, says he, when
you prayed me to take your cloak, that I was doing a charitable action
to some poor Galla fainting with fatigue, and perhaps with hunger;
but, since I have had it in my hands, I have found you an instructor
of kings and nobles, a leader of armies and maker of laws. Take your
cloak, therefore, and wash it yourself, which is what Providence has
ordained to be your business; it is a safer trade, and you will have
less time to censure your superiors, which can never be a proper or
useful occupation to a fellow like you.”

The king took his wet cloak, and the rebuke along with it, and, on his
return, he sent for the man to Gondar, and raised him in a short time
to the first offices in the state. He possessed his entire confidence;
and he deserved it. He was the only man to whom the king had confided
his fears of the usurper Welleta Georgis. While Bacuffa was supposed
to be ill, the queen and this officer only present, he mentioned, for
the first time, some surprise that no such person as Welleta Georgis
had appeared during so long and so many inquiries, and could not help
dropping some words as if he doubted the truth of this prophecy.

Badjerund Waragna, for that was the name of the king’s friend,
maintained modestly that it might be a temptation of the devil to
mislead him to his destruction. He told the king, that, by his own
account of it, this Welleta Georgis was to have no power over _him_, as
he was only to appear in his son’s time. He begged him, therefore, to
lay aside all further thoughts of his prophecy, whilst he trusted his
son’s succession to God’s mercy, and to the prayers, the charity, and
prudence of the queen. The Iteghé all this time was lost in silence.
She desired the king to repeat to her the whole circumstances of the
prophecy, which he distinctly did. “I wish,” says she laughing, “this
Welleta Georgis may not be now nearer us than we imagine; perhaps in
the palace.” “In the palace!” says the king, with great emotion. “I
doubt so,” says the queen; “suppose it should be me your own wife; for
Welleta Georgis was the name given to me in baptism; and your late
coronation of me, should a minority happen in the person of your son,
or even a grandson, undoubtedly leaves me regent of the kingdom by
your own intentions when you made me Iteghè.”

Whether the king was convinced or not, is not known; but he, from this
time, desisted from his persecution of Welleta Georgis; and this the
queen often told me among several anecdotes of that singular reign.
She was my great patroness while at Gondar, and from her I received
constant protection in the most disastrous times. To the credit of the
prophet, she continued regent full thirty years; till the folly and
ambition of her own family gave her a master that put an end to all her
influence, except what she enjoyed from exemplary piety, and the most
extensive works of charity and mercy.

The king died after a vigorous reign, and after having cut off the
greatest part of the ancient nobility near Gondar, who were of age
to have been concerned in the transactions of the last reigns. This
has rendered his memory odious, though it is universally confessed he
saved his country from an aristocratical or democratical usurpation;
both equally unconstitutional, as they equally struck at the root of
monarchy.

The queen, with very great prudence, concealed the day of the king’s
death; nor did any one, after the last experiment, affect rashly to
believe that his death was real. Thus all were upon their guard against
another resurrection. In that interval, she called her brothers from
Kuara, and strengthened her son’s and her own government, by putting
the principal offices of state into the hands of persons attached to
her family, so that, though her son Yasous was an infant, no attempt
was at that time made towards any resolution. Even after the king’s
death was known to be real, for many years afterwards there were people
of credit at different times found, who said they had met him at sundry
places alive; whether by instigation, for any particular purpose, or
not, is difficult to say.

[Illustration]




YASOUS II. OR, ADIAM SEGUED.

From 1729 to 1753.

    _Rebellion in the beginning of this Reign--King addicted
    to hunting--To building, and the Arts of Peace--Attacks
    Sennaar--Loses his Army--Takes Samayat--Receives Baady King of
    Sennaar under his Protection._


Besides the queen, mother of Yasous, Bacuffa had several other wives
and divers children by them; none of them, however, had any degree
of interest, or many followers, owing to the very singular practice
of Bacuffa, already mentioned, in not admitting to his bed, from the
time of his coming to the crown, any women except the queen, mother of
Yasous, without having first so far intoxicated them with liquor as to
produce an oblivion of all that passed at the interview. Some say this
arose from his own jealous ideas; but the most general opinion was,
that it was a kind of covenant with the queen, by which she pardoned
him this temporary alienation of his person, for this security, that
he was to give her no rival in his confidence. Indeed, his own temper
led him naturally to estrange himself from every intimate connection,
that could pretend to any lawful share with him in government. And this
had gone so far, that he sent his wife, favourite as she was, and his
son Yasous, to the low, hot, and unwholesome province of Walkayt, the
ordinary place to which state criminals were banished, in order that
they might be under the eye of Ain Egzie, a confidential servant of
his, and governor of that province. It is true this was done without
any mark of disgust; and the queen returned immediately by his own
command; but Yasous staid at Walkayt with Ain Egzie, till he was four
years old, without the king his father having shewn any anxiety for his
return.

The queen’s first care was to call her brothers to court. The eldest,
Welled de l’Oul, had been a favourite of the late king, and occupied
under him a very considerable post in the palace. Geta, her second
brother, was a man of slow parts, but esteemed a good soldier; being
covetous, he was not a favourite of the people, and less so of the
king. The third was Eshtè, (pronounced in that country Shitti); he was
amiable, liberal, affable, and brave, but rather given to indolence
and pleasure, which alone hindered him from being a good statesman
and general. He was a kind friend to strangers, a good master, and
placable enemy; stedfast to his promise, and on all occasions a lover
of truth; a quality so very rare in Abyssinia, that it was said there
had not been one in this respect like him since the time of Yasous the
Great. Notwithstanding this, Bacuffa liked him not, as being too great
a favourite of the people, and, for that reason, never gave him any
employment.

The next brother was Eusebius, a very brave and skilful soldier, but
rash, avaricious, passionate, and treacherous, and as great an enemy
to truth as his brother Eshtè was a friend to it. Bacuffa, upon some
slight complaint, had resolved to put him to death; and, though he was
dissuaded from this, he could never be so far reconciled to him as ever
to release him from prison. The fifth brother was Netcho, whom the
desire of living at home, or, perhaps, a want of money to defray his
expences at court, kept low and in obscurity all his life-time. Yet he
was a tried, gallant, and skilful soldier; and in later years, when
I was at Gondar, was often praised as such by Ras Michael, the best
judge, because the greatest general of his time, though, by reason of
Netcho’s private life, and absence from court, he never charged him
with any important commission. Another brother was dead, and had left a
son called Mammo, a good horseman, the only quality, as far as I know,
that he possessed to which could justly be annexed the epithet of Good.

Of these brothers, Geta and Netcho were alive in my time. Eshtè was
dead, but had left two sons, Ayto Engedan and Ayto Aylo, who were
among the most intimate of my friends, from my entering Ethiopia till
my leaving it; both were brave and good, and endowed with excellent
qualities. Engedan, without any allowance for his country, and want of
education, was, I think, by very much, the most amiable and complete
man that I have ever yet seen.

Sanuda, son of Welled de l’Oul, played a very considerable part in the
revolution that happened in my time; was of a figure more than ordinary
graceful; was brave, and did not want good dispositions; but these
were obscured by debauchery in wine and women, to which there were no
bounds. Eusebius left two sons, both more worthless and profligate than
himself, and both came to untimely ends: Guebra Mehedin, the eldest,
was slain in a private quarrel at Lebec by a near relation, Kasmati
Ayabdar, after having robbed my servants and plundered my baggage, in
Foggora, near the village Dara; and the second, Ayto Confu, was killed
in rebellion at the battle of Serbraxos, among the Begemder horse,
fighting against his sovereign.

Mammo we shall find acting insignificant parts at times, never
trusted, nor of consequence to any one. As for the queen herself,
she was reputed the handsomest woman of her time. She was descended
from Victor, eldest brother to Menas, and son of David, who died
without coming to the crown. This daughter was married to Robel,
governor of Tigré, whose mother was a Portuguese, and the queen
inherited the colour of her European ancestors; indeed was whiter than
most Portuguese. She was very vain of this her descent; had a warm
attachment to the Catholic religion in her heart, as far as she could
ever learn it; nor did she value herself less upon her beauty, as we
may judge by the several names she took at different times. The first
was Iteghè Mantuab, or _the beautiful queen_; the second was Berhan
Magwass, or _the glory of grace_; though her christened name was
Welleta Georgis, as we have already observed.

After the death of her husband, Bacuffa, she is said to have descended
to a variety of attachments of short duration. She married a man of
quality, Kasmati Netcho of Kuara, by whom she had three daughters. The
first was Ozoro Esther, of whom I shall often speak, being, next to her
mother, the greatest friend I had in Abyssinia, and one who had the
most frequent opportunities of being so. She was married, in very early
life, to Kasmati Netcho of Tcherkin, a man of great personal qualities,
and who had a very large territory, reaching down to the Pagan blacks,
or Troglodytes, called Shangalla.

This marriage was of very short duration. Netcho left one son, Ayto
Confu, my very great and firm, though young friend, who likewise
inherited his father’s fortune and virtues. She was afterwards married
to Ayo Mariam Barea, (excepting Ras Michael) reputed the best general
in Abyssinia, but who died before I came into the country. By him she
had one son and a daughter, infants. Lastly, she was married to Ras
Michael, by whom she had two sons, the favourites of Michael’s old
age. Rustic and cruel as that old tyrant was, bred up in blood, and
delighting in it, she governed him despotically, from the day of her
marriage, yet so prudently, as to excite the envy of no one, excepting
the murderers of her husband Mariam Barea, who, luckily, were also the
constitutional enemies of her country.

The second daughter of the Iteghé was Ozoro Welleta Israel, the most
beautiful woman in Abyssinia, with whom I had very little acquaintance,
she being at constant war with Ras Michael. She had married a nobleman
of the first consideration, to whom half of the large and rich province
of Gojam belonged, by whom she had Aylo, one of the largest men that I
ever saw, the only particular remarkable in him.

The third was Ozoro Altash, married to Welled Hawaryat, Ras Michael’s
son, by whom she had three children, two sons and one daughter. One of
them died of the small-pox soon after my arrival at Gondar, as did his
father also; the other son and daughter happily recovered.

Bacuffa had provided sufficiently for the security of his provinces, by
placing tried and veteran officers in his governments. Elias, indeed,
was Ras and Betwudet at Gondar, and he was suspected of wishes contrary
to his allegiance; but far before any, in the confidence of the late
king, was Waragna Shalaka, that is, colonel of a regiment of Djawi
Galla, with which he defended the provinces of Damot and Agow against
his countrymen on the other side of the Nile; for he was a Galla of
that nation himself, and his name was Usho, which signifies _a dog_.
But it was more by his interest, which he preserved with those people,
than by his arms, that he kept those barbarians from wasting that
country.

The reader will easily remember the first occasion of his coming to
Gondar was when Bacuffa saw him washing his clothes in a pool of water;
and from the reproof, and his behaviour to the king on that occasion,
as well as the duty and implicit obedience he paid to his commands
afterwards, he was called Waragna, by way of contradiction, that word
signifying a sturdy rebel, or one that stands up in defiance of the
king. That name became much more famous afterwards in the person of
his son, Waragna Fasil, to the very great detriment of the country in
general.

The first thing the queen did was to send Shalaka Waragna, and
Billetana Gueta David, with a large body of Mahometan fusileers, Djawi
and Toluma Galla, to guard the mountain of Wechné, where the males of
the royal family were imprisoned, that no competitor might be released
from thence. The next step was to marry Ozoro Welleta Tecla Haimanout
to Ras Elias, to confirm him, if possible, in his much suspected
allegiance. After which, the Ras, judges, and soldiers of the king’s
household, made this proclamation--“Bacuffa, king of kings, is dead!
Yasous, king of kings, liveth! Mourn for those that are dead, and
rejoice with those that are alive!” Orders were then given for burying
Bacuffa with all magnificence possible.

The first thing that seemed the beginning of trouble in the new
regency, and likely to destroy the calm that had hitherto subsisted,
was an information given by Azage Georgis against Tecla Saluce, a great
officer at court. Georgis accused him before the king and council, that
he had been heard to say that king Yasous was dangerously ill. Tecla
Saluce absolutely denied this charge, and said it was an invention
of his enemy Georgis, and challenged him to prove it. Evidence being
called, he was convicted in the most direct and satisfactory manner;
was therefore condemned to death, and hewn to pieces at the king’s gate
that same day by the common soldiers.

Here is a species of treason without any overt act. The imagining the
king’s death, which seems much to resemble the law of England, may
be defended from the importance of the case, but scarcely from any
principle of justice or reason.

It soon appeared that a conspiracy had been on foot; several great
men fled from court, among these Johannes, who had the charge of the
king’s horses. But Shalaka Waragna and Billetana Gueta David, being
sent immediately after him, this conspiracy was soon stifled, and
the ringleaders dispersed, mostly into Amhara, where they were taken
prisoners by Woodage governor of the province, and sent to the king.
Johannes, finding it impossible to escape, took to one of those papyrus
boats used in navigating the lake Tzana; and, being driven by the wind,
landed in an island[92] belonging to the queen, where he was taken
prisoner, with his wife and family, and delivered up, on condition that
he should not be put to death.

Kasmati Cambi, returning from Damot, fell accidentally upon Palambaras
Masmari and several others, and brought them prisoners to Gondar. A
council was thereupon held, and the conspirators put upon their trial.
Palambaras Masmari, and Abou Barea who was one of the judges, were
condemned to be hanged on the tree before the palace-gate. Johannes and
the rest were committed to close prison, in the hands of the Betwudet.

It was thought a proper expedient to check these disorders, to hasten
the coronation of the king, though very young. The judges and all the
officers being assembled in the presence-chamber, where the king sits
on his throne, (for in the council-chamber he sits in a kind of cage,
or close balcony) where no part of him is discovered, Sarach Masseri
Mammo, whose office it was, stood up with the Kees Hatzé, or king’s
almoner; when this last had anointed him with oil, Mammo placed the
crown upon his head; upon which the whole assembly, his mother only
excepted, fell down and paid him homage; and at his inauguration he
took the name of Adiam Segued.

On a separate throne, on his right hand, sat the queen-mother. She,
too, was crowned, though not anointed; but the same homage was
performed to her that had been done to the king, who sat on the throne
with his head covered; nor did the Abuna interfere, nor was his
attendance judged any part of the ceremony.

The first seeds of discontent had been sown in Damot, where a party of
rebels had attacked Kasmati Cambi in the night, cut most of his army to
pieces, and obliged Shalaka Job to fly into Gojam, and then return in
haste to Gondar.

The king found no better remedy against this rebellion than to appoint
Kasmati Waragna governor of Damot, and Sanuda guardian of Wechné, with
orders to take with him a son of the late Oustas the usurper, and
confine him with the king’s sons upon that mountain. At the same time
he appointed Ayo governor of Begemder; both these preferments being
much to the satisfaction of the whole nation. Waragna, knowing the
necessities of his province, marched from Gondar with what forces he
could collect, and took up his head-quarters at Samseen, where, on
the very night after his arrival, he was set upon by Tensa Mammo at
the head of the Agows. However unexpected this was, Waragna, a good
soldier, was not to be taken by surprise. He knew the country, and
had not a great opinion either of the force or courage of the enemy,
or capacity of their general. Presenting, therefore, only one half of
his troops, which could not be easily discovered in the dark, he sent
Fit-Auraris Tamba to make a small compass, and fall upon their rear
with the other half. Mammo’s troops, thinking this to be a fresh and
separate army, immediately took to flight, and were many of them slain,
after leaving behind them their tents, baggage, and the greatest part
of their fire-arms, which had been of very little service to them in
the dark.

Waragna, who knew the consequence of his province was the riches of
it, and the dependence the capital had upon it for constant supplies
of provisions, was loath to pursue his victory farther, if any means
could be fallen upon to bring about a pacification. To effect this,
he dispatched messengers to his friends, the Galla, on the other side
of the Nile, ordering them to be ready to pass the river on the day
he should appoint, and to lay waste the country of the Agow with fire
and sword. He then decamped with his army from Samseen, and marched to
Sacala, and took up his head-quarters in St Michael’s church, where
he found the Agows in the utmost terror from apprehension of being
over-run with barbarians. But he soon eased them of their fears by a
proclamation, in which he told them plainly, that it was owing to the
goodness of the country, and not any merit in the people, that the
king’s palace and capital was so plentifully supplied with provisions
from thence; that all his pursuit was peace, but that he was resolved
to effect that end by every possible means; therefore the time was now
come that they were to make a resolution, and abide by it, to submit
and behave peaceably as good citizens ought; or, when his army of Galla
joined him, he would extirpate them to the last man. In the mean time,
he published an amnesty of all that had passed.

The Agows knew well that they were in the hands of one who was no
trifler, nor in his heart much their friend. They ran to him, ready to
make that composition which he should raise from them for their past
transgressions and his future protection. The tribute laid upon them,
for both was moderate beyond all expectation, 2000 oxen for the king
and queen, and 500 for himself; upon which he left Sacala, and entered
Goutto, a very fertile country, between Maitsha and the Agows, where he
used the same moderation, and by these means quieted and reconciled his
whole province.

Nothing could have been more advantageous to the king’s affairs than
the prudent conduct of this wise officer, which left him at liberty to
afford him his assistance; for in the mean time a conspiracy was formed
at Gondar, which had taken deep root, and had a powerful faction,
Elias, late Ras and Betwudet, Tensa Mammo, Guebra l’Oul, Matteos and
Agnè, all principal men in Gondar, and possessed of great riches and
dependencies throughout the whole kingdom.

On the 8th of December 1734, being joined by their followers from
without, they all rendezvoused upon the river Kahha, below the
town. After holding council in the king’s house which is there, they
resolved to proclaim one of the princes upon the mountain Wechné, named
Hezekias, king. For this purpose, furnished with a kettle-drum, they
marched in three divisions, by three different ways, to the palace,
avowedly with an intention to force the gates and murder the king and
queen. But Fit-Auraris Ephraim, having intelligence of this tumult,
first shut up and obstructed all the entrances to the king’s house,
then gave advice to Billetana Gueta, Welled de l’Oul, of the rebellion
of Tensa Mammo, their design to murder the king, and their having
proclaimed Hezekias.

These immediately repaired to the king’s house to take council together
what was to be done, and to defend the place if it was necessary. The
rebels were now drawn up, and were beating their kettle-drum to make
their proclamation, “Hezekias was king!” while Shalaka Tchinsho, a
young nobleman of great hopes, who commanded the troops in the court
where was the outer gate, impatient to hear an usurper proclaimed in
the very face of his sovereign, directed the outer-court gate to be
opened, and, with two bodies of Galla, Djawi and Toluma, and several
corps of lances, which compose the king’s household, however inferior
in number, he rushed upon the rebels so suddenly, that they were soon
obliged to think of other occupation.

The first that fell was Asalessi Lensa, who stood by the drum, and was
slain by Shalaka Tchinsho with his own hand; his drum taken and sent to
the king as the first fruits of the day. The soldiers, encouraged by
the example of their leader, fell fiercely upon the rebels, dispersed
and broke through them wherever they saw the greatest number together;
a great slaughter was made, and Tensa Mammo, with difficulty, escaped.
The victory indeed would have been complete, had not an accidental
shot from a distance wounded Shalaka Tchinsho mortally. His own people
carried him within the gate of the palace, where he gloriously expired
at the feet of his sovereign.

The rebels, notwithstanding this check, increased every day in number
and resolution, when the news arrived that Waragna had composed all the
differences in Damot, Agow, and Goutto, and, at the head of a numerous
army, was waiting the king’s orders. This intelligence first had the
effect to disconcert the rebels, who suddenly left the capital in their
way to Wechné.

The king, now master of Gondar, ordered a proclamation to be made for
all persons whatever holding fiefs of the crown, as also all others,
to assemble before him on a short day, where the Itchegué and Abuna,
holding the picture of our Saviour, with the crown of thorns[93], up
before the people, did administer to them a solemn oath, to live and
die with the king and Iteghé; a feeble experiment, often tried by a
weak government. The only consequence of this was present expence to
the crown in a distribution of beef, honey, butter, wheat, and all
kinds of provisions; after which each man returned to his house, ready
to repeat the perjury ten times a day for the same emolument, and same
sincerity.

Messengers were next dispatched to Kasmati Waragna, ordering him to
come to Gondar with the greatest force he could raise. The same day
Azage Kyrillos, whom the king had made governor of Wechné, and Azage
Newaia Selassé, went to the mountain, pretending that king Yasous was
dead, and that the choice of the principal members of government had
fallen upon Hezekias, who thereupon was delivered to him, and saluted
king; and, without losing time, they marched to Kahha, and encamped on
that river below Gondar.

In the mean while, the great men and officers of the court, and in
particular those who had estates and houses in Gondar, began to
consider the danger of the town at the so near approach of the rebels.
Several districts, or streets, situated on eminences, by shutting up
access to them, were made tenable posts, and, having filled them with
good soldiers, they set about the defence of the town and annoying the
enemy. Hezekias had removed to the house of Basha Arkillidas; and it
was agreed to send their whole forces to see if they could succeed in
forcing the king’s house. But before this another stratagem was tried
to alienate the minds of the people of Gondar from their sovereign. It
was said that certain Roman Catholic priests had arrived at Gondar;
that they were shut up privately in the palace with the king and queen;
and, upon the Abuna and Itchegué coming to Hezekias to ask him how he
happened to be proclaimed king, without making to them some confession
of his faith, (a question they put to all young or weak princes),
Hezekias answered, It was because he had heard the Itchegué, and the
rest of the clergy, seemed to be careless about the true faith, by
suffering Catholic priests to live with the king in the palace. A
great ferment immediately followed; all the monks, priests, and madmen
that could be assembled, (and on these occasions they gather quickly),
with the Itchegué and Abuna at their heads, went to Dippabye, the open
place before the palace, and pronounced the Iteghè, Yasous, and all
their abettors, accursed and given up to burn with Dathan and Abiram.

For several days and nights attempts were made to set fire to, and
break open the gate. But the loyalists charged them so vigorously upon
all these occasions, especially Billetana Gueta Welled de l’Oul, and
the walls of the palace were so exceedingly thick and strong, that
little progress was made in proportion to the men these attempts cost
daily. However, on that side of the palace called Adenaga, the rebels
had lodged themselves so near as to set part of it on fire.

The king’s house in Gondar stands in the middle of a square court,
which may be full an English mile in circumference. In the midst of
it is a square tower, in which there are many noble apartments. A
strong double wall surrounds it, and this is joined by a platform roof;
loop-holes, and conveniences for discharging missile weapons, are
disposed all around it. The whole tower and wall is built of stone and
lime; but part of the tower being demolished and laid in ruins, and
part of it let fall for want of repair, small apartments, or houses of
one storey, have been built in different parts of the area, or square,
according to the fancy of the prince then reigning, and these go now
by the names of the ancient apartments in the palace, which are fallen
down.

These houses are composed of the frail materials of the country, wood
and clay, thatched with straw, though, in the inside, they are all
magnificently lined, or furnished. They have likewise magnificent
names, which we have mentioned already. These people, barbarous as they
are, have always had a great taste for magnificence and expence. All
around them was silver, gold, and brocade, before the Adelan war, in
which they lost the commerce of that country, by losing their connexion
with India.

The next night the soldiers of Elias made their lodgments so near the
walls, that, with fiery arrows, they set one of these houses, called
“Werk Sacala,” within the square, in flames; but Welled de l’Oul, with
the Toluma Galla, sallying at that instant, surprised Elias’s soldiers,
not expecting such interruption, and put the greatest part of them to
the sword, setting on fire the houses that were near the palace, till
part was entirely burnt to the ground. The next night, an attempt was
made upon the gate to blow it up with gunpowder; but, before it was
completed, the two rebels employed in the work were shot dead from the
wall, and their train miscarried.

On the 25th of December they burned a new house in the town built by
the king, called Riggobee Bet. These frequent fires had turned the
minds of people in general very much against Hezekias the rebel. The
night after, there was another great fire in the king’s house; Zeffan
Bet, and another large building, were destroyed by the rebels, as was
the church of St Raphael. Gondar looked like a town that had been taken
by an enemy, and battles were every day fought in the streets, with no
decisive advantage to either party. Some part of the town was on fire
every night; nobody knew for what reason, nor what was the quarter that
was next to be burnt.

In the mean time, Azage Georgis arrived in the country of the Agows
at Basil Bet, where Waragna was, and delivered him the king’s order,
that he should make all possible haste to his assistance at Gondar,
with as large an army as he could suddenly bring; and these dispatches
conferred upon him at the same time, as a mark of favour, the post of
Ibaba Azage, or governor of Ibaba, together with Elmana and Densa, two
districts inhabited by Galla, subjects to the king, which posts were
then held by Tensa Mammo, and forfeited by his rebellion.

The next morning Waragna left his head-quarters at Basil Bet; thence he
marched to Gumbali, and thence to Sima. At Sima he heard, that, the day
before, it had been proclaimed at Ibaba, by orders of Tensa Mammo, that
Yasous was dead, and Hezekias was now king; upon this intelligence he
marched from Sima, and, while it was yet early in the day, he came to
Ibaba.

The first inquiry was concerning the Shum (or chief of the town) left
there by Tensa Mammo; and this man, coming readily to him to receive
his commands, and offer him any service in his power, was asked by
whose orders the proclamation of Hezekias was made? Being answered,
by Tensa Mammo’s, he directed the Shum and his two sons to be hanged
on three separate trees in the middle of the town; the Shum with
the nagareet round his neck which had served in the proclamation
of Hezekias; he then declared Tensa Mammo a rebel and outlaw, and
confiscated his estate to the king’s use.

At Ibaba he met Fit-Auraris Tamba, with a large body of Damots and
Djawi; then he decamped from Ibaba, and, at the bridge over the
Nile, was met by Azage Georgis, with all Maitsha, Elmana, and Densa
following, and thence proceeded to Waira, where he set Arkillidas at
liberty. This officer, after distinguishing himself before all others
in the king’s defence, had been taken prisoner by Tensa Mammo, and
sent thither. Advancing into Foggora, with a large army, he halted
at Gilda, and sent some soldiers on the road to Gondar, to see if he
could apprehend any travellers, especially those going or coming to or
from market. But, after three days waiting on the road, the soldiers
returned without any person or intelligence, by which he judged the
town was already in great straits. In two days after, he advanced to
Wainarab, and thence he sent his Fit-Auraris forward to set a house
at Tedda on fire, to shew to the king at Gondar that he was thus
far advanced to his assistance. This barbarous custom of burning a
house wherever an army encamps, though but for an hour, is invariably
practised, as a signal by armies, throughout all Abyssinia.

At this time there was a treaty begun between the king and Tensa Mammo.
The rebels, weary of the little advantage they had gained, and hearing
Waragna was about to march against them, offered the queen her own
terms, provided she published a general amnesty, and that each man
should be allowed to keep the posts he had before the rebellion. The
queen, weary and terrified with war, readily agreed to this proposal;
and this facility, instead of accelerating the treaty, gave the rebels
an opportunity of asking further terms, and a settlement was spoken of
for the king Hezekias, in some of the low provinces near Walkayt.

Welled de l’Oul, the queen’s brother, a man in whom the rebels had
trust, seconded his sister’s desire, and carried on the treaty, but
from different motives; it was his opinion, that, to make peace with
the rebels, leaving their party unbroken, was to spread the infection
of rebellion all over the kingdom; and to let them keep their posts,
was leaving a sword in their hands to enable them to defend themselves
on any future occasion. He therefore thought, that, as the king had
Waragna now at his command, they should make use of him to pluck up
this rebellion by the roots, cut off all the ringleaders, and disperse
the faction; but, in the mean time, in order to be able to effect this,
they should keep up the appearance of being anxious for agreeing, in
order to lull the enemy asleep, till Waragna made his instructions and
designs known to the king.

From Wainarab, Waragna sent a messenger to let the king and queen know
of his arrival; and with him came Arkillidas, that no doubt might
remain of the truth of the message. This officer told the king, that
Waragna should advance to Tedda, and offer the rebels battle there; but
if they retired (as he heard they intended) to Abra, he would follow
them thither. He desired the king also to issue his orders to the
several Shums to guard the roads, that as few of the ringleaders of the
rebels might escape as possible.

Hezekias, with his army, decamped, taking the road to Woggora; and
Waragna, following him, came up with him at Fenter, on January 20th
1735. The rebels, inferior in number, though they did not wish an
engagement at that time, were too high-minded to avoid it when offered.
Both armies fought a long time with equal fortune; and though Waragna
at the first onset had slain two men with his own hands, and taken
two prisoners, the battle was supported with great firmness till the
evening, when Waragna ordered all his Galla, the men of Maitsha,
Elmana, and Densa, to leave their horses, and charge the enemy on foot.
This confident step, unknown and unpractised by Galla before, had the
desired effect. The Galla now fought desperately for life, not for
victory, being deprived of their only means of saving themselves by
flight.

Most of the principal officers among the rebels being killed or
wounded, their army at last was broken, and took to flight. Hezekias
was surrounded and taken, fighting bravely; being first hurt in
the leg, and then beat off his horse with a stone. The pursuit was
presently stayed. Tensa Mammo escaped safely through Woggora, a
disaffected province; and had now passed the Tacazzé, when he was taken
by the men of Siré, and brought to the king for the reward that had
been offered for his head by Waragna.

Hezekias was brought to his trial before the king, nor did he presume
to deny his guilt. He was therefore sentenced to die, and committed to
close prison. Tensa Mammo was arraigned, and, although he confessed
the treason, he pleaded the peace he had made with the king before
the arrival of Waragna at Gondar. This plea was unanimously over-ruled
by the judges, because the treaty had not been completed. He was,
therefore, sentenced to die, and immediately carried out to the
daroo-tree before the palace, and hanged between two of his most
confidential counsellors.

The Abuna and Itchegué were next ordered to appear, and answer for the
crime of high treason in excommunicating the king; they declared they
proceeded on no other grounds than an information, that the king and
queen were turned Franks, and had two Catholic priests with them in
the palace. The men complained of were produced, and proved to be two
Greeks; Petros, a native of Rhodes, and Demetrius. This explanation
being given, the Abuna and Itchegué thereupon asked pardon of the king
and queen, and were ordered to make their recantation at Dippabye,
which they immediately did, declaring they were wrong, and had
proceeded on false information.

It was on the 28th of January that Sanuda and Adero were ordered to
carry king Hezekias to Wechné, which they did, and left him there
without disfiguring him in any part of his body, as is the cruel, but
usual custom in such cases. But both the Iteghè and her son were of the
most merciful disposition; and the general reputation they had for this
was often the cause of tumults and rebellions that would not have had
birth in severer reigns.

It was not long after this when there appeared a pretender to the
crown, very little expected. He said he was the old king Bacuffa; that
he had given it out that he was dead, for political reasons, and was
come again to claim his crown and kingdom. Never was resurrection
so little wished for as this; a violent fear fell upon part of the
multitude for some time; but his name making no party, whether true or
false, he was seized upon without bloodshed, tried, and condemned to
die. This punishment was changed into one of a _supposed_ gentler kind,
the cutting off his leg, and sending him to Wechné. The operation,
always performed in the grossest manner by an ax, high up the leg, and
near the knee, is generally fatal; for there is no one, having either
skill or care, to take up the ends of the veins and arteries separated
by the amputation; they only apply useless stiptics and bandages, of
no effect, till the patient bleeds to death. This is the common case,
so that the pretended Bacuffa died, in consequence of the operation,
before he came to Wechné, though he was by his sentence reprieved from
death.

The king, now arrived at the seventh year of his reign, proclaimed a
general hunt, which is a declaration of his near approach to manhood;
but he pursued it no length, and again returned to Gondar.

At that time, a great party of the queen’s relations was made against
Ayo governor of Begemder, It began by a competition between Kasmati
Geta the queen’s brother, and Ayo, who should have that province. The
common voice was for Ayo, not only as a man of the greatest interest
in the province, but in all respects unexceptionable throughout the
kingdom. Welled de l’Oul, (brother to Geta) however, being now Ras
and Betwudet, Geta governor of Samen, Eusebius, and all the rest of
them in high places at court, Geta was preferred to the government
of Begemder. Ayo, though avowedly a good subject of the king, was
determined not to be made a sacrifice to a party. He therefore refused
to resign his government, and prepared to defend himself.

Upon this, Adero, governor of Gojam, with the whole forces of that
province, passed the Nile, and entered Begemder; Geta on the side of
Samen, and last of all Welled de l’Oul marched with a royal army to
join the forces that had already begun to lay waste the country, where
unusual excesses were committed. Ayo’s house was burned to the ground,
so were all those of his party, and their lands destroyed, greatly to
the general damage of the province and capital. Ayo was now obliged to
save himself by flight. It was said, that the king (though his army was
ready) refused to march against Ayo; but with a party of his own set
out for Aden, on the frontiers of Sennaar, to hunt there; nor did he
return till the executions were over in Begemder.

Adero fell back to Gojam, and Welled de l’Oul to Gondar soon after.
The king himself appeared very much contented with his own expedition,
in which he had shown great dexterity and bravery, having killed
two young elephants, and a gomari, or hippopotamus, with his own
hands. Nor did he stay any time at Gondar, or make any preferments,
the usual consequences of victories, but prepared again for another
hunting-expedition, or an attack upon the Shangalla. The queen and
Welled de l’Oul opposed strongly his resolution. But Yasous seemed to
be weary of being governed. He was fast advancing to manhood, and of
a disposition rather forward for his age. His expedition against the
Shangalla was attended with no accident; and he returned to Gondar on
the 3d of June, with a number of slaves, much better pleased that he
had neglected, rather than taken, his mother’s advice.

It was on the 23d day of December that Yasous again set out on another
hunting-party, and killed two elephants and a rhinoceros. He then
proceeded to Tchelga, and from Tchelga to Waldubba; thence he went
to the rivers Gandova and Shimfa. These are two rivers we shall have
occasion frequently to speak of in our return through Sennaar, in which
kingdom the one is called Dender, the other Rahad. Here he exercised
himself at a very violent species of hunting, that of forcing the
gieratacachin, which means long-tail; it is otherwise called giraffa in
Arabic. It is the tallest of beasts; I never saw it dead, nor, I think,
more than twice alive, and then at a distance. It is, however, often
killed by the elephant-hunters. Its skin is beautifully variegated when
young, but turns brown when arrived at any age. It is, I apprehend, the
camelopardalis, and is the only animal, they say, that, in swiftness,
will beat a horse in the fair field.

It was not with a view to hunt only, that Yasous made these frequent
excursions towards the frontiers of Sennaar. His resolution was formed
(as it appeared soon after) in imitation of his forefather Socinios,
to revive his right over the country of the _Shepherds_, his ancient
vassals, who, since the accession of strength by uniting with the
Arabs, had forgot their ancient tribute and subjection, as we have
already observed.

The king in five days marching from Gidara came to a station of the
Daveina, which is a tribe of shepherds, by much the strongest of any
in Atbara. He fell into their encampments a little before the dawn of
day. The first shew they made was that of resistance, till they had got
their horses and camels saddled; they then all fled, after the king
had killed three of them with his own hand. Ras Woodage signalized
himself likewise by having slain the same number with the king. The
cattle, women, and provisions fell all into the king’s hand, and were
driven off to Gondar. Their arrival gave the town an entertainment to
which they had a long time been strangers. Many thousand camels were
assembled in the plain, where stands the palace of Kahha, (upon a river
of that name) large flocks of horned cattle, of extraordinary beauty,
were also brought from Atbara, which the king ordered to be distributed
among his soldiers, and the priests of Gondar, and such of the officers
of state as had been necessarily detained on account of the police, and
had not followed the army.

This year, 1736, there happened a total eclipse of the sun which very
much affected the minds of the weaker sort of people. The dreamers and
the prophets were everywhere let loose, full of the lying spirit which
possessed them, to foretel that the death of the king, and the downfal
of his government were at hand, and deluges of civil blood were then
speedily to be spilt both in the capital and provinces. There was not,
indeed, at the time any circumstance that warranted such a prediction,
or any thing likely to be more fatal to the state, than the expenditure
of the large sums of money that the turn the king had taken subjected
him to.

He had built a large and very costly church at Koscam, and he was
still engaged in a more expensive work in the building of a palace at
Gondar. He was also rebuilding his house at Riggobee-ber, (the north
end of the town) which had been demolished by the rebels; and had begun
a very large and expensive villa at Azazo, with extensive groves, or
gardens, planted thick with orange and lemon trees, upon the banks of
a beautiful and clear river which divides the palace from the church
of Tecla Haimanout, a large edifice which, some time before, he had
also built and endowed. Besides all these occupations, he was deeply
engaged in ornamenting his palace at Gondar. A rebellion, massacre,
or some such misfortune, had happened among the Christians of Smyrna;
who, coming to Cairo, and finding that city in a still less peaceable
state than the one which they had left, they repaired to Jidda in their
way to India; but missing the monsoon, and being destitute of money
and necessaries, they crossed over the Red Sea for Masuah, and came
to Gondar. There were twelve of them silver-smiths, very excellent in
that fine work called filligrane, who were all received very readily by
the king, liberally furnished both with necessaries and luxuries, and
employed in his palace as their own taste directed them.

By the hands of these, and several Abyssinians whom they had taught,
sons of Greek artists whose fathers were dead, he finished his
presence-chamber in a manner truly admirable. The skirting, which in
our country is generally of wood, was finished with ivory four feet
from the ground. Over this were three rows of mirrors from Venice, all
joined together, and fixed in frames of copper, or cornices gilt with
gold. The roof, in gaiety and taste, corresponded perfectly with the
magnificent finishing of the room; it was the work of the Falasha, and
consisted of painted cane, split and disposed in Mosaic figures, which
produces a gayer effect than it is possible to conceive. This chamber,
indeed, was never perfectly finished, from a want of mirrors. The king
died; taste decayed; the artists were neglected, or employed themselves
in ornamenting saddles, bridles, swords, and other military ornaments,
for which they were very ill paid; part of the mirrors fell down; part
remained till my time; and I was present when the last of them were
destroyed, on a particular occasion, after the battle of Serbraxos, as
will be hereafter mentioned.

The king had begun another chamber of equal expence, consisting of
plates of ivory, with stars of all colours stained in each plate at
proper distances. This, too, was going to ruin; little had been done in
it but the alcove in which he sat, and little of it was seen, as the
throne and person of the king concealed it.

Yasous was charmed with this multiplicity of works and workmen. He
gave up himself to it entirely; he even wrought with his own hand,
and rejoiced at seeing the facility with which, by the use of a
compass and a few straight lines, he could produce the figure of a
star equally exact with any of his Greeks. Bounty followed bounty. The
best villages, and those near the town, were given in property to the
Greeks that they might recreate themselves, but at a distance, always
liable to his call, and with as little loss of time as possible. He
now renounced his favourite hunting-matches and incursions upon the
Shangalla and Shepherds of Atbara.

The extraordinary manner in which the king employed his time soon made
him the object of public censure. Pasquinades began to be circulated
throughout the capital; one in particular, a large roll of parchment,
intituled, “The expeditions of _Yasous the Little_.” The king in
reality was a man of short stature. The Ethiopic word Tannush, joined
to the king’s name Yasous el Tannush, applied both to his stature and
actions. So Tallac, the name given to another Yasous, his predecessor,
signified great in capacity and atchievement, as well as that he was of
a large and masculine person.

These expeditions, though enumerated in a large sheet of parchment,
were confined to a very few miles; from Gondar to Kahha, from Kahha
to Koscam, from Koscam to Azazo, from Azazo to Gondar, from Gondar to
Koscam, from Koscam to Azazo, and so on. It was a similar piece of
ridicule upon his father Philip, as we are informed, that, in the last
century, cost Don Carlos, prince of Spain, his life.

This satire nettled Yasous exceedingly; and, to wipe off the imputation
of inactivity and want of ambition, he prepared for an expedition
against Sennaar. It was not, however, one of those inroads into Atbara
upon the Arabs and Shepherds, whom the Funge had conquered and made
tributary to them; but was a regular campaign with a royal army, aimed
directly at the very vitals of the monarchy of Sennaar, the capital
of the Funge, and at the conquest or extirpation of those strangers
entirely from Atbara.

We have seen, in the course of our history, that these two kingdoms,
Abyssinia and Funge, had been on very bad terms during several of the
last reigns; and that personal affronts and slights had passed between
the cotemporary princes themselves. Baady, son of L’Oul, who succeeded
his father in the year 1733, had been distinguished by no exploits
worthy of a king, but every day had been stained with acts of treachery
and cruelty unworthy of a man. No intercourse had passed between Yasous
and Baady during their respective reigns; there was no war declared,
nor peace established, nor any sort of treaty subsisting between them.

Yasous, without any previous declaration, and without any provocation,
at least as far as is known, raised a very numerous and formidable
army, and gave the command of it to Ras Welled de l’Oul; and Kasmati
Waragna was appointed his Fit-Auraris. The king commanded a chosen
body of troops, separate from the rest of the army, which was to act
as a reserve, or as occasion should require, in the pitched battle.
This he ardently wished for, and had figured to himself that he was
to fight against Baady in person. Yasous, from the moment he entered
the territory of Sennaar, gave his soldiers the accustomed licence
he always had indulged them with, when marching through an enemy’s
country. He knew not, in these circumstances, what was meant by mercy;
all that had the breath of life was sacrificed by the sword, and the
fire consumed the rest.

An universal terror spread around him down to the heart of Atbara. The
Shepherds and Arabs, as many as could fly, dispersed themselves in
the woods, which, all the way from the frontiers of Abyssinia to the
river Dender, are very thick, and in some places almost impenetrable.
Some of the Arabs, either from affection or fear, joined Yasous in
his march; among these was Nile Wed Ageeb, prince of the Arabs; others
taking courage, gathered, and made a stand at the Dender, to try their
fortune, and give their cattle time to pass the Nile, and then, if
defeated, they were to follow them. Kasmati Waragna, (as Fit-Auraris)
joined by the king, no sooner came up with these Arabs on the banks
of the Dender, than he fell furiously upon them, broke and dispersed
them with a considerable slaughter; then leaving Ras Welled de l’Oul
with the king, and the main body to encamp, taking advantage of the
confusion the defeat of the Arabs had occasioned, he advanced by a
forced march to the Nile, to take a view of the town of Sennaar.

Baady had assembled a very large army on the other side of the river,
and was preparing to march out of Sennaar; but, terrified at the king’s
approach, the defeat of the Arabs, and the velocity with which the
Abyssinians advanced, he was about to change his resolution, abandon
Sennaar, and retire north into Atbara.

There is a small kingdom, or principality, called Dar Fowr, all
inhabited by negroes, far in the desert west of Sennaar, joining with
two other petty negro states like itself, still farther westward,
called Selé and Bagirma, while to the eastward it joins with Kordofan,
formerly a province of Dar Fowr, but conquered from it by the Funge.

Hamis, prince of Dar Fowr, had been banished from his country in a late
revolution occasioned by an unsuccessful war against Selé and Bagirma,
and had fled to Sennaar, where he had been received kindly by Baady,
and it was by his assistance the Funge had subdued Kordofan. This
prince, a gallant soldier, could not bruik to see the green standard
of his prophet Mahomet flying before an army of Christians; and, being
informed of the king’s march and separation from the main body nearly
as soon as it happened, he proposed to Baady, that, as an allurement
to Yasous to pass the river with only the troops he had with him, he
should do from prudence what he resolved to do from fear, and fall
back behind Sennaar, leaving it to Yasous to enter; but, in the mean
time, that, he should dispatch him with 4000 of his best horse, armed
with coats of mail, to pass the Nile at a known place below, on the
right of Welled de l’Oul, on whom he should fall by surprise, and, if
lucky enough to defeat him, as was probable, he would then close upon
Yasous’s rear, which would of necessity either oblige him to surrender,
or lose his life and army in attempting to repass the river between
the two Nubian armies. This counsel, for many reasons was perfectly
agreeable to Baady, who instantly fell back from covering Sennaar, and
then detached Hamis to make a circuit out of sight, and cross the Nile
as proposed.

In the mean time, Yasous advanced to Basboch, where he found
the current too rapid, and the river too deep for his infantry.
He dispatched, therefore, a messenger to Welled de l’Oul for a
reinforcement of horse, and gave his infantry orders to retire to
the main body upon the arrival of the reinforcement of cavalry. This
resolution he had taken upon advancing higher up the river from
Basboch, till opposite to the town of Sennaar, and when divided only
from it by the Nile. He there saw the confusion that reigned in that
large town. No preparation for resistance being visible, the cries
of women at the sight of an enemy so near them, and the hurry of
the men deserting their habitation loaded with the most valuable of
their effects, all increased the king’s impatience to put himself in
possession of this capital of his enemy.

It happened that an Arab, belonging to Nile Wed Ageeb, had seen the
manœuvre of Hamis and his cavalry. This man, crossing the Nile at the
nearest ford, came and told his master, Wed Ageeb, what he had seen,
who informed the king of his danger. Upon interrogating the Arab, it
was found that the affair of Welled de l’Oul would certainly be over
before the king could possibly join him; and in that case he must
fall in the midst of a victorious army, and his destruction must then
be inevitable, if he attempted it. It was, therefore, agreed, as the
only means possible to save the king and that part of the army he had
with him, to retreat in the route Shekh Nile should indicate to them,
marching up with the river Nile close on their right hand, and leaving
the desert between that and the Dender, which is absolutely without
water, to cover their left. This was executed as soon as resolved.

In the mean time, Hamis had crossed the Nile, and continued his march
with the utmost diligence, and, in the close of the evening, had fallen
upon Welled de l’Oul as unexpectedly as he could have wished. The
Abyssinians were everywhere slaughtered and trodden down before they
could prepare themselves for the least resistance. All that could fly
sheltered themselves in the woods: but this refuge was as certain death
as the sword of the Funge; for, after leaving the river Dender, all the
country behind them was perfectly destitute of water. Ras Welled de
l’Oul, and some other principal officers, under the direction of some
faithful Arabs, escaped, and, with much difficulty, two days after,
joined the king.

Besides these, the army, consisting of 18,000 men, either perished
by the sword, by thirst, or were taken prisoners; all the sacred
reliques, which the Abyssinians carry about with their armies to ensure
victory, and avert misfortune; the picture of the crown of thorns,
called _sele quarat rasou_; pieces of the true cross; a crucifix
that had on many occasions spoke, (which should ever after be dumb
since it spoke not that day); all these treasures of priestcraft were
taken by the Funge, and carried in triumph to Sennaar. Great part of
those Arabs, who had joined the king in his march northward, had now
quitted him and attached themselves to the pursuit of the fugitive
remains of Welled de l’Oul’s army. As these Arabs were those that lived
nearest the Abyssinian frontier, and to whom the king had done no
harm, because they had mostly joined him, no sooner was he informed of
their treachery, but just arrived in their country, and scarcely out
of danger from the pursuit of the Funge, Yasous turned short to the
left, destroying with fire and sword all the families of those that had
forsaken him, and so continued to do till arrived on the banks of the
Tacazzé.

The Arabs and Shepherds there, many of whom had just returned from
the destruction of Welled de l’Oul’s army at Sennaar, and were now
rejoicing their families with the news of so complete a victory, and
that all danger from the Christian army was over, were astonished
to see Yasous at the head of a fresh and vigorous army, burning and
destroying their country, and committing all sort of devastation, when
they thought him long ago dead, or fugitive, and skulking half-famished
on the banks of the Dender.

The king returned in this manner to Gondar, carrying more the
appearance of a conqueror than one who had suffered the loss of a
whole army, his soldiers being loaded with the spoils of the Arabs,
and multitudes of cattle driven before them. It was but too visible,
however, by the countenances of many, how wide a difference there was
between the loss and the acquisition.

It was, indeed, not from the presence or behaviour of the king, nor yet
from his discourse, that it could be learned any such misfortune had
befallen him. On the contrary, he affected greater gaiety than usual,
when talking of the expedition; and said publicly, and laughing, one
day, as he arose from council, “Let all those who were not pleased
with the song of Koscam sing that of Sennaar.” From this many were
of opinion, that he enjoyed a kind of malevolent pleasure from the
misfortune which had befallen his army, who, not content with seeing
him cultivate and enjoy the arts of peace, had urged him to undertake a
war of which there was no need, and for which there was no provocation
given, though in it there was every sort of danger to be expected.

Although Yasous gave no consolation to his people, the priests and
fanatics soon endeavoured to prepare them one. Tensa Mammo arrived from
Sennaar with the crown of thorns, the true cross, and all the rest of
that precious merchandise, safe and entire, only a little profaned by
the bloody hands of the Moors. Ras Welled de l’OuL’s army, consisting
of 18,000 of their fellow-citizens, was lying dead upon the Dender.
It was no matter; they had got the speaking crucifix, but had paid
8000 ounces of gold for it. Still it was no matter; they had got the
crown of thorns. The priests made processions from church to church,
singing hallelujahs and songs of thanksgiving, when they should have
been in sackcloth and ashes, upon their knees deprecating any further
chastisement upon their pride, cruelty, and profaneness. All Gondar was
drunk with joy; and Yasous himself was astonished to see them singing
the song of Sennaar much more willingly than that of Koscam.

At this time died Abuna Christodulus; and it was customary for the king
to advance the money to defray the expence of bringing a successor. But
Yasous’s money was all gone to Venice for mirrors; and, to defray the
expence of bringing a new Abuna, as well as of redeeming of the sacred
reliques, he laid a small tax upon the churches, saying merrily, “that
the Abuna and the crosses were to be maintained, and repaired by the
public; but it was incumbent upon the church to purchase new ones when
they were worn out.”

Theodorus, priest of Debra Selalo, Likianos of Azazo, and Georgis
called Kipti, were consigned to the care of three Mahometan merchants
and brokers at court, whose names were Hamet Ali, Abdulla, and
Abdelcader, to go to Cairo and fetch a successor for Christodulus. They
arrived at Hamazen on April 29th 1743, where the Mahometan guides chose
rather to pass the winter-season than at Masuah, as at that place they
were apprehensive they would suffer extortions and ill-usage of every
sort. We know not what came of Georgis Kipti; but, as soon as the rainy
season was over, Theodorus and Likianos came straight to Masuah.

As soon as the Naybe got the whole convoy of priests and Mahometans
into his hands, he demanded of them half of the money the king had
given them to defray the expences of fetching the Abuna. He pretended
also, that both Mahometans and Christians should have passed the rainy
season at Masuah. He declared that this was his perquisite, and that
he had prepared great and exquisite provisions for them, which, being
spoiled and become useless, it was but reasonable they should pay as if
they had consumed them: till this was settled, he declared that none of
them should embark or stir one step from Masuah.

The news of this detention soon arrived at Gondar; and Yasous gave
orders that Michael Suhul, governor of Tigré, (afterwards Ras) and
the Baharnagash, should with an army blockade Masuah, so as to starve
the Naybe into a more reasonable behaviour. But, before this could be
executed, the Naybe had called the priests before him, and declared,
if they did not surrender the money that instant, he would put them to
death; and, in place of giving them time to resolve, he gave them a
very plain hint to obey, by ordering the executioner to strike off the
heads of two criminals condemned for other crimes, after having brought
them into their presence. The poor wretches, Theodorus and Likianos,
did not resemble Portuguese, who would have braved these threats in the
pursuit of martyrdom. The sight of blood was the most convincing of
all arguments the Naybe could use. They gave up the money, leaving the
division of it to his own discretion. He then hurried them on board a
vessel, giving Michael and the Baharnagash notice that they were gone
in safety, and that he had obeyed the king’s orders in all respects.
Michael was at that time in the strictest friendship with the Naybe,
who was his principal instrument in collecting fire-arms in Arabia
to strengthen him in the quarrel he was then meditating against his
sovereign.

On the 8th of February 1744 the priests and their guides sailed from
Masuah; and they did not arrive at Jidda till the 14th of April. There
they found that the ships for Cairo were gone, and that they had lost
the monsoon; and, as no misfortune comes single, the Sherriffe of Mecca
made a demand upon them for as much money as they had paid the Naybe;
and, upon refusal, he put Abdelcader in prison, nor was he released for
a twelvemonth after, when the money was sent from Abyssinia; and it
was then agreed, that 75 ounces of gold[94] should in all future times
be paid for leave of passage to those who went to Cairo to fetch the
Abuna; and 90 ounces a piece to the Sherriffe, and to the Naybe, for
allowing him to pass when chosen, and furnishing him with necessaries
during his stay in their respective government; and this is the
agreement that subsists, to this day.

In this interim, Likianos of Azazo, one of the priests, weary of the
journey and of his religion, and having quarrelled with Abdulla,
renounced the Christian faith, and embraced that of Mahomet; and
Theodorus, Abdulla, and Hamet Ali, being the only three remaining,
hired a vessel at Jidda to carry them to the port of Suez, the bottom
of the Arabic Gulf. Before they had been a month at sea, Abdulla died,
as did Hamet Ali seven days after they arrived at Suez. They had been
on sea three months and six days from Jidda to that port, because they
sailed against the monsoon.

It was the 25th of June that Theodorus arrived at Cairo, delivered the
king’s present, the account of the Abuna’s death, and the king’s desire
of having speedily a successor. The patriarch, having called together
all his bishops, priests, and deacons, conferred the dignity on a
monk of the Order of St Anthony, the only Order of monks the Coptic
church acknowledges. These pass a very austere life in two convents
in a dreary desert, never tasting flesh, but living on olives, salt
sardines[95], wild herbs, and the worst of vegetables. Yet so attached
are they to this solitude, that, when they are called to be ordained to
this prelature of Abyssinia, a warrant from the basha, and a party of
Turks, is necessary to bring this elect one to Cairo in chains, where
he is kept in prison till he is ordained; guarded afterwards, and then
forced on board a vessel which carries him to Abyssinia, whence he is
certain never to return.

The Abuna departed from Suez the 20th of September; the beginning of
November he arrived at Jidda; in February 1745 he sailed from Jidda,
taking with him Abdelcader, now freed from prison; he arrived at Masuah
the 7th of March, and immediately sent an express to notify his arrival
to the king and queen, and to Ras Welled de l’Oul. Congratulations
upon the event were returned from each of them; they requested he would
immediately come to court; but this the Naybe refused to permit, till
he had first received his dues; and Yasous seemed inclined to pay no
more for him than what he had cost already.

The priests, and devout people in Tigré, were very desirous to free
the Abuna from his confinement in Masuah. They saw that the king was
not inclined to advance money, and all of them knew perfectly, that,
whatever face he put upon the matter, the Ras would not give an ounce
of gold to prevent the Abuna from staying there all his life. In this
exigency they applied to Janni, a Greek, living at Adowa, (of whom
I shall hereafter speak), a confidential servant and favourite of
Michael, and also well acquainted at Masuah, to see if he could get him
released by stratagem. Janni concerted the affair with the monks of
the monastery of Bizan, two of whom conducted the Abuna by night out
of the island of Masuah, and landed him safely in their monastery in
the wilderness, with the _myron_, or consecrated oil, in one hand, and
his missal, or liturgy, in the other. So far the escape was complete;
but unluckily no orders had been given for Theodorus, who accordingly
remained behind at Masuah.

The Naybe, exasperated at the Abuna’s flight, wrecked his vengeance on
poor Theodorus; he put him in irons, and threw him into close prison,
where he remained for two months. There was no remedy but paying
80 ounces of gold to the Naybe for his release; he might else have
remained there for ever.

The king, not a little surprised at these frequent insolences on the
part of the Naybe, began to inquire what could be the reason; for
he perfectly knew, not only Suhul Michael, the governor of Tigré,
but even the Baharnagash could reduce Masuah to nothing with their
little finger; and he was informed, that a strong friendship subsisted
between the Naybe and Suhul Michael, and that it was by relying on his
friendship that the Naybe adventured to treat the king’s servants, at
different times, in the manner he had done.

Yasous, desirous to verify this himself, and to dissolve the bands of
so unnatural a friendship, marched into Tigré with a considerable army.
Passing by Adowa, the residence of Suhul Michael, he was pleased with
the warlike appearance of this his feat of government, and the perfect
order and subordination that reigned there. Certain disorders and
tumults were said to prevail in the neighbouring province of Enderta
where Kasmati Woldo commanded. The savage people, called Azabo, living
at Azab, the low country below Enderta and the Dobas, (a nation of
_Shepherds_ near them, still more savage, if possible, than them) had
laid waste the districts that were next to their frontier, burning the
churches, and slaying the priests in the daily inroads which they made
into Abyssinia. All these things, bad enough indeed, were at this time
aggravated, as was thought, for two reasons; the first was to cast
an odium upon Kasmati Woldo, Michael’s great enemy, as incapable of
governing his province; the second, to prevent the king in his progress
to Masuah, as he openly professed his fixed intention was to punish the
Naybe with the utmost severity.

The protection of his subjects, therefore, from the savages, was
represented to the king as the most pressing service; and, marching
with his usual diligence straight to Enderta, he was met there by
Kasmati Woldo, an old experienced officer, who aiming at no preferment,
paying his tribute punctually, and having been constantly occupied in
repelling the incursions of the Pagans on the frontier, had not been at
court since the reign of Theophilus.

After receiving the necessary information about the country he intended
to enter, and taking Kasmati Woldo’s two sons with him, the king
descended into the low country of Dancali, once a petty Mahometan
kingdom, and friendly to Abyssinia, now a mixture of Galla and the
natives called Taltal. Without delay he pushed on to Azab, spreading
desolation through that little province, always desert enough from its
nature, though formerly, from its trade, one of the richest spots in
the world.

The king then turned to the right upon the Dobas, who, not expecting
an army of that strength, fled and left their whole cattle a prey to
Yasous and his soldiers; a greater number was scarce ever seen in
Abyssinia. The king now returned to Enderta, where he confirmed Kasmati
Woldo in his government with distinguished marks of favour; and he this
year again came back victorious to Gondar, leaving his campaign against
the Naybe for another season.

In passing by Adowa, a fray happened among the king’s troops and those
of Michael; several were killed on both sides; and, as the dispute
was between Tigré and Amhara, the two great divisions of the country,
it threatened to create a party-quarrel between the soldiers of one
division and those of the other. No notice was taken of this when
Yasous marched eastward; but, on his return, Michael begged the king
to interfere, and make peace between the two parties. To this Yasous
answered, That he did not think it worth his while, for they would make
peace themselves when they were tired of quarrelling.

Whether this was the motive of sending for Michael to Gondar, or
whether it was the story of the Naybe, or what else was the king’s
motive, we do not know; but, so soon as he was arrived in the capital,
he sent Kasmati Ephraim, and Shalaka Kefla, into Tigré, commanding
Michael’s attendance at Gondar. This Michael absolutely refused; he
pretended Kasmati Woldo had estranged the king’s affection from him,
and that Yasous had called him to Gondar now to put him to death,
upon a pretence of his soldiers quarrel with the king’s troops. This
refusal was repeated to Yasous, without any palliation whatever; and
he instantly marched from Gondar, and encamped upon the river Waar,
where he was reinforced a few days afterwards by Ras Welled de l’Oul,
whose intention was to persuade Michael to submission; for he had been
advised not to trust the king’s oath of forgivenness unless he had
likewise that of Welled de l’Oul.

The king’s readiness disconcerted Suhul Michael. Tho’ well armed and
appointed himself, as also an excellent general, he did not risk the
presenting himself against the king on a plain; for Yasous was much
beloved by the soldiers, and always very kind and liberal to them.

The mountain Samayat, though not the most inaccessible in Tigré, was a
place of great consequence and strength, when possessed by an army and
officer such as Michael. To this natural fortress he carried all his
valuable effects, occupied and obstructed all the avenues to it, and
resolved there to abide his fortune. The king, with his army, sat down
at the foot of the mountain; and, encircling it with troops, he ordered
it to be assaulted on four sides at once; on one, by Kasmati Ayo,
governor of Begemder; on the second, by Kasmati Waragna; the third, by
Kasmati Woldo; and the fourth, by Ras Welled de l’Oul. The king himself
went round about to every place, giving his orders, encouraging his
men, and fighting himself in the foremost ranks like a common soldier.
The mountain was at length carried, with much bloodshed on both sides,
and Michael was beat from every part of it but one, which, though not
strong enough to hold out against the king’s army, if well defended
could not be carried without great loss of men.

Here Michael desired to capitulate. But, before he left the mountain
and surrendered to the king, he desired that an officer of trust
might be sent to him, because he had then upon the mountain a large
collection of treasure, which he desired to keep for the king’s use,
otherwise it would be dissipated and lost in the hands of the common
soldiers. The Ras sent two confidential officers, who took from the
hands of Michael a prodigious sum of gold, the precise amount of which
is not named. He then descended the mountain, carrying, as is the
custom of the country for vanquished rebels, a stone upon his head, as
confessing himself guilty of a capital crime. A violent storm of rain
and wind prevented, for that day, his coming into the presence of the
king; and the devil, as the Abyssinians believe, began in that storm a
correspondence with him which continued many years; I myself have often
heard him vaunt of his having maintained, ever since that time, an
intercourse with St Michael the archangel.

On the morning of the 27th of December, Ras Welled de l’Oul ordered
Michael to attend him in the habit of a penitent; and, followed by his
companions in misfortune, (that part of his troops which was taken
on the mountain) and surrounded by a number of soldiers, with drums
beating and colours flying, he was carried into the king’s presence.

Ras Welled de l’Oul had, with difficulty, engaged the king’s promise
that he was not to put him to death. The good genius of Yasous and his
family was labouring by one last effort to save him. On seeing Michael
upon the ground, Yasous fell into a violent transport of rage, spurned
him with his foot, declaring he retracted his promise, and ordered him
to be carried out, and put to death before the door of his tent. Ras
Welled de l’Oul, Kasmati Waragna, Kasmati Woldo, and all the officers
of consideration, either of the court or army, now fell with their
faces upon the ground, crying to the king for mercy and forgivenness.
Yasous, if in his heart he did not relent, still was obliged to pardon
on such universal solicitation; and this he did, after making the
following observation, which soon after was looked on as a prophecy:
“I have pardoned that traitor at your instance, because I at all times
reward merit more willingly than I punish crimes; but I call you all to
witness, that I wash my hands before God to-day of all that innocent
blood Michael shall shed before he brings about the destruction of his
country, which I know in his heart he has been long meditating.”

I cannot help mentioning it as an extraordinary circumstance, that
at the time I was at Gondar, in the very height of Suhul Michael’s
tyranny, a man quarrelled with another who was a scribe, and accused
him before Michael of having recorded this speech of the king, as I
have now stated it, in a history that he had written of Yasous’s reign.
The book was produced, the passage was found and read; and I certainly
expected to have seen it torn to pieces, or hung upon a tree about
the author’s neck. On the contrary, all the Ras said was, “If what he
writes is true, wherein is the man to blame?” And turning with a grin
to Tecla Haimanout, one of the judges, he said, “Do you remember? I
do believe Yasous did say so.” The book was restored to the author,
and no more said of the matter, not even an order was given to erase
the passage. He had no objection to Yasous and to his whole race being
prophets; he had only taken a resolution that they should not be kings.

A general silence followed this speech of Yasous, instead of the
acclamations of joy usual in such cases. The king then ordered Ras
Welled de l’Oul to lead the army on to Gondar, which he did with
great pomp and military parade, while the king, who could not forget
his forebodings, retired to an island, there to fast some days in
consequence of a vow that he had made. This being finished, Yasous
returned to Gondar; and, as he was now in perfect peace throughout his
kingdom, he began again to decorate the apartments of his palace. A
large number of mirrors had arrived at this time, a present from the
Naybe of Masuah, who, after what had happened to his friend Michael,
began to feel a little uneasy about the fate of his island.

While Yasous was thus employed, news were sent him from Kasmati Ayo,
governor of Begemder, that he had beat the people of Lasta in a pitched
battle in their own country, had forced their strong-holds, dispersed
their troops, and received the general submission of the province,
which had been in rebellion since the time of Hatzè Socinios, that is,
above 100 years. Immediately after these news, came Ayo himself to
parade and throw his _unclean_ trophies of victory before the king,
and brought with him many of the principal people of Lasta to take the
oaths of allegiance to the king.

Yasous received the accounts of the success with great pleasure, and
still more so the oaths and submissions made to him. He then added
Lasta to the province of Begemder, and cloathed Ayo magnificently, as
well as all those noblemen that came with him from Lasta. The end of
this year was not marked with good fortune like the beginning. A plague
of locusts fell upon the country, and consumed every green thing, so
that a famine seemed to be inevitable, because, contrary to their
custom, they had attached themselves chiefly to the grain. This plague
is not so frequent in Abyssinia as the Jesuits have reported it to be.
These good fathers indeed bring the locusts upon the country, that, by
their pretended miracles, they may chace them away.

Michael had continued some time in prison, in the custody of Ras Welled
de l’Oul. But he was afterwards set at full liberty; and it was now
the 17th year of Yasous’s reign, when, on the 17th of September 1746,
at a great promotion of officers of state, Michael, by the nomination
of the king himself, was restored to his government of Tigré; and,
a few days after, he returned to that province. All his ancient
friends and troops flocked to him as soon as he appeared, to welcome
him upon an event looked upon by all as nearly miraculous. Nor did
Michael discourage that idea himself, but gave it to be understood,
among his most intimate friends, that a vision had allured him that
he was thenceforward under the immediate protection of St Michael the
archangel, with whom he was to consult on every emergency.

As soon as he had got a sufficient army together, the first thing he
did was to attack Kasmati Woldo, without any provocation whatever;
and, after beating him in two battles, he drove him from his province,
and forced him to take refuge among the Galla, where, soon after, by
employing small presents, he procured him to be murdered; the ordinary
fate of those who seek protection among those faithless barbarians.

It will seem extraordinary that the king, who had such recent
experience of both, the one distinguished for his duty, the other for
his obstinate rebellion, should yet tamely suffer his old and faithful
servant to fall before a man whom in his heart he so much mistrusted.
But the truth is, all Michael’s danger was past the moment he got
free access to the king and queen, though he was deservedly esteemed
to be the ablest soldier in Abyssinia of his time, he was infinitely
more capable in intrigues, and private negociations at court, than
he was in the field, being a pleasant and agreeable speaker in common
conversation; a powerful and copious orator at council; his language,
whether Amharic or Tigré, (but above all the latter) correct and
elegant above any man’s at court; steady to the measures he adopted,
but often appearing to give them up easily, and without passion, when
he saw, by the circumstances of the times, he could not prevail: though
violent in the pursuit of riches, when in his own province, where he
spared no means nor man to procure them, no sooner had he come to
Gondar than he was lavish of his money to extreme; and indeed he set no
value upon it farther than as it served to corrupt men to his ends.

When he surrendered his treasure at the mountain Samayat, he is said to
have divided it into several parcels with his own hand. The greatest
share fell to the king, who thought he had got the whole; but the
officers who received it, and saw different quantities destined for the
Iteghé and Ras Welled de l’Oul, took care to convey them their share,
for fear of making powerful enemies. Kasmati Waragna had his part;
and even Kasmati Woldo, though Michael soon after plundered and slew
him. All Gondar were his friends, because all that capital was bribed
on this occasion. It was gold he only lent them, to resume it, (as he
afterwards did) with great interest, at a proper time.

It still remained in the king’s breast to wipe off his defeat at
Sennaar, as he had, upon every other occasion, been victorious; and
even in this, he still flattered himself he had not been beat in
person. He set out again upon another expedition to Atbara; instead
of coasting along the Dender, he descended along the Tacazzé into
Atbara, where, finding no resistance among the Shepherds, he attached
himself in particular to the tribe called Daveina, which, in the former
expedition, had joined Welled de l’Oul’s army. Upon the first news of
his approach they had submitted; but, notwithstanding all promises and
pretences of peace, he fell upon them unawares, and almost extirpated
the tribe.

Suhul Michael, while the king was thus occupied in the frontier of his
province, did every thing that a faithful, active subject could do.
He furnished him constantly with the best intelligence, supplied him
with the provisions he wanted, and made, from time to time, strong
detachments of troops to reinforce him, and to secure such posts as
were most commodious and important in case of a retreat becoming
necessary.

Yasous, who had succeeded to his wish, was fully sensible of the value
of such services, and sent, therefore, for Michael, commanding his
attendance at Gondar. There was no fear, no hesitation now, as before
in the affair of Samayat. He decamped upon the first notice, even
before the rainy season was over, and arrived at Gondar on August 30th
1747, bringing with him plenty of gold; few soldiers, indeed, but those
picked men, and in better order, than the king had ever yet seen troops.

It was plain now to everybody, that nothing could stop Michael’s
growing fortune. He alone seemed not sensible of this. He was humbler
and less assuming than before. Those whom he had first bribed he
continued still to bribe, and added as many new friends to that list
as he thought could serve him. He pretended to no precedency or
pre-eminence at court, not even such as was due to the rank of his
place, but behaved as a stranger that had no fixed abode among them.

One day, dining with Kasmati Geta, the queen’s brother, who was
governor of Samen, and drinking out of a common-glass decanter called
Brulhé, when it is the privilege and custom of the governor of Tigré
to use a gold cup, being asked, Why he did not claim his privilege? he
said, All the gold he had was in heaven, alluding to the name of the
mountain Samayat, where his gold was surrendered, which word signifies
Heaven. The king, who liked this kind of jests, of which Michael was
full, on hearing this, sent him a gold cup, with a note written and
placed within it, “Happy are they who place their riches in heaven;”
which Michael directed immediately to be engraved by one of the Greeks
upon the cup itself. What became of it I know not; I often wished
to have found it out, and purchased it. I saw it the first day he
dined, after coming from council, at his return from Tigré, after the
execution of Abba Salama; but I never observed it at Serbraxos, nor
since. I heard, indeed, a Greek say he had sent it by Ozoro Esther, as
a present to a church of St Michael in Tigré.

Enderta was now given him in addition to the province of Tigré, and,
soon after, Siré and all the provinces between the Tacazzé and the Red
Sea; so he was now master of near half of Abyssinia.

The rest of this king’s reign was spent at home in his usual amusements
and occupations. Several small expeditions were made by his command,
under Palambaras Selassé, and other officers, to harrass the Shepherds,
whom he conquered almost down to Suakem. His ravages, however, had
been confined to the peninsula of Atbara, and had not ever passed to
the eastward of the Tacazzé, but he had impoverished all that country.
After this, by his orders, the Baharnagash, and other officers, entered
that division called Derkin, between the Mareb and the Atbara, and,
still further, between the Mareb and the mountains, in a part of it
called Ajam. In this country Hassine Wed Ageeb was defeated by the
Baharnagash with great slaughter; and the Shekh of Jibbel Musa, one of
the most powerful of the Shepherds, was taken prisoner by Palambaras
Selassé, without resistance, and carried, with his wife, his family,
and cattle, in triumph to Gondar, where, having sworn allegiance to the
king, he was kindly treated, and sent home with presents, and every
thing that had been taken from him.

This year, being the 24th of Yasous’s reign, he was taken ill, and died
on the 21st day of June 1753, after a very short illness. As he was but
a young man, and of a strong constitution, there was some suspicion he
died by poison given him by the queen’s relations, who were desirous to
secure another minority rather than serve under a king, who, by every
action, shewed he was no longer to be led or governed by any, but least
of all by them.

Yasous was married very young to a lady of noble family in Amhara,
by whom he had two sons, Adigo and Aylo. But their mother pretending
to a share of her husband’s government, and to introduce her friends
at court, so hurt Welleta Georgis the Iteghé, or queen-regent, that
she prevailed on the king to banish both the mother and sons to the
mountain of Wechné.

In order to prevent such interference for the future, the Iteghé
took a step, the like of which had never before been attempted in
Abyssinia. It was to bring a wife to Yasous from a race of Galla. Her
name was Wobit, daughter of Amitzo, to whom Bacuffa had once fled when
he escaped from the mountain before he was king, and had been kindly
entertained there. Her family was of the tribe of Edjow, and the
division of Toluma, that is, of the southern Galla upon the frontiers
of Amhara. They were esteemed the politest, that is, the least
barbarous of the name. But it was no matter, they were Galla, and that
was enough. Between them and Abyssinia, oceans of blood had been shed,
and strong prejudices imbibed against them, never to be effaced by
marriages. She was, however, brought to Gondar, christened by the name
of Bessabéc, and married to Yasous: By her he had a son, named Joas,
who succeeded his father.

[Illustration]




JOAS.

From 1753 to 1768.

    _This Prince a Favourer of the Galla his Relations--Great
    Dissentions on bringing them to Court--War of Begemder--Ras
    Michael brought to Gondar--Defeats Ayo--Mariam Barea refuses to
    be accessary to his Death--King favours Waragna Fasil--Battle
    of Azazo--King Assassinated in his Palace._


UPON the first news of the death of king Yasous, the old officers and
servants of the crown, remembering the tumults and confusion that
happened in Gondar at his accession, repaired to the palace from their
different governments, each with a small well-regulated body of troops,
sufficient to keep order, and strengthen the hands of Ras Welled de
l’Oul, whom they all looked upon as the father of his country. The
first who arrived was Kasmati Waragna of Damot; then Ayo of Begemder,
and very soon after, though at much the greatest distance, Suhul
Michael, governor of Tigré. These three entered the palace, with
Welled de l’Oul at their head, and received the young king Joas from
the hands of the Iteghé his grandmother, and proclaimed him king, with
the usual formalities, without any opposition or tumult whatever.

A number of promotions immediately followed; but it was observed with
great discontent by many, that the Iteghé’s family and relations were
grown now so numerous, that they were sufficient to occupy all the
great offices of state without the participation of any of the old
families, which were the strength of the crown in former reigns; and
that now no preferment was to be expected unless through some relation
to the queen-mother.

Welled Hawarayat, son to Michael governor of Tigré, had married Ozoro
Altash, the queen’s third daughter, almost a child; and long before
that, Netcho of Tcherkin had married Ozoro Esther, likewise very
young; and Ras Michael, old as he was, had made known his pretensions
to Ozoro Welleta Israel, the queen’s second daughter, immediately
younger than Ozoro Esther. These proposals, from an old man, had been
received with great contempt and derision by Welleta Israel, and she
persevered so long in the derision of Michael’s courtship, that it left
strong impressions on the hard heart of that old warrior, which shewed
themselves after in very disagreeable consequences to that lady all the
time Michael was in power.

The first that broke the peace of this new reign was Nanna Georgis,
chief of one of the clans of Agows of Damot. Engaged in old feuds with
the Galla on the other side of the Nile, the natural enemies of his
country, he could not see, but with great displeasure, a Galla such
as Kasmati Waragna, however worthy, governor of Damot, and capable,
therefore, of over-running the whole province in a moment, by calling
his Pagan countrymen from the other side.

Waragna, though this was in his power, knew the measure was unpopular.
Kasmati Eshté was the queen’s brother, and governor of Ibaba, a royal
residence, which has a large territory and salary annexed to it. When,
therefore, at council, he had complained of the injury done to him by
Nanna Georgis, he refused the taking upon him the redressing these
injuries, and punishing the Agows, unless Kasmati Eshté was joined in
the commission with him.

The reason of this was, as I have often before observed, that, as the
Agows are those that pay the greatest tribute in gold to the king,
and furnish the capital with all sorts of provisions, any calamity
happening in their country is severely felt by the inhabitants of
Gondar; and the knowledge of this occasions a degree of presumption and
confidence in the Agows, of which they have been very often the dupes.
This, indeed, happened at this very instant. For Waragna and Eshtè
marched from Gondar, and with them a number of veteran troops of the
king’s household of Maitsha, depending on Ibaba; and this army, without
bringing one Galla from the other side of the Nile, gave Nanna Georgis
and his Agows such an overthrow that his clan was nearly extirpated,
and many of the principal of that nation slain.

Nanna Georgis, who chiefly was aimed at as the author of this revolt,
escaped, with great difficulty, wounded, from the field; and the feud
which had long subsisted between Waragna’s family and the race of
the Agows, received great addition that day, and came down to their
posterity, as we shall soon see by what happened in Waragna’s son’s
time at the bloody and fatal battle of Banja.

The next affair that called the attention of government, was a
complaint brought by the monks of Magwena, a ridge of rocks of but
small extent not far from Tcherkin, the estate of Kasmati Netcho.
These mountains, for a great part of the year, almost calcined under a
burning sun, have, in several months, violent and copious showers of
rain, which, received in vast caves and hollows of the mountain, and
out of the reach of evaporation, are means of creating and maintaining
all sorts of verdure and all scenes of pleasure, in the hot season of
the year, when the rains do not fall elsewhere; and as the rocks have
a considerable elevation above the level of the plain, they are at no
season infected with those feverish disorders that lay the low country
waste.

Netcho was a man of pleasure, and he thought, since the monks, by
retiring to rocks and deserts, meant thereby to subject themselves to
hardship and mortification, that these delightful and flowery scenes,
the groves of Magwena, were much more suited to the enjoyment of
happiness with the young and beautiful Ozoro Esther, than for any set
of men, who by their austerities were at constant war with the flesh.
Upon these principles, which it would be very difficult for the monks
themselves to refute, he took possession of the mountain Magwena, and
of those bowers that, though in possession of saints, did not seem to
have been made for the solitary pleasures of one sex only. This piece
of violence was, by the whole body of monks, called Sacrilege. Violent
excommunications, and denunciations of divine vengeance, were thundered
out against Kasmati Netcho. An army was sent against him; he was
defeated and taken prisoner, and confined upon a mountain in Walkayt,
where soon after he died, but not before the Iteghè had shewn her
particular mark of displeasure, by taking her daughter Ozoro Esther,
his wife, from him, that she, too, and her only son Confu, might not
be involved in the monk’s excommunications, and the imputed crime of
sacrilege.

At this time died Kasmati Waragna, full of years and glory, having,
though a stranger, preserved his allegiance to the last, and more than
once saved the state by his wisdom, bravery, and activity. He is almost
a single example in their history, of a great officer, governor of a
province, that never was in rebellion, and a remarkable instance of
Bacuffa’s penetration, who, from a single conversation with him, while
engaged in the vilest employment, chose him as capable of the greatest
offices, in which he usefully served both his son and grandson.

Soon after, Ayo governor of Begemder, an older officer still than
Waragna, arrived in Gondar, and resigned his government into the
queen’s hands. This resignation was received, because it was understood
that it was directly to be conferred upon his son Mariam Barea, by far
the most hopeful young Abyssinian nobleman of his time. Another mark
of favour, soon followed, perhaps was the occasion of this. Ozoro
Esther, the very young widow of Netcho, was married, very much against
her own consent, to the young governor of Begemder, and this marriage
was crowned with the universal applause of court, town, and country;
for Mariam Barea possessed every virtue that could make a great man
popular; and it was impossible to see Ozoro Esther, and hear her speak,
without being attached to her for ever after.

Still the complaint remained, that there was no promotion, no
distinction of merit, but through some relation to the queen-mother;
and the truth of this was soon so apparent, and the discontent it
occasioned so universal, that nothing but the great authority Ras
Welled de l’Oul, the Iteghé’s brother, possessed, could hinder this
concealed fire from breaking out into a flame.

The queen, mother to Joas, was Ozoro Wobit, a Galla. Upon Joas’s
accession to the throne, therefore, a large body of Galla, said to be
1200 horse, were sent as a present to the young king as the portion
of his mother. A number of private persons had accompanied these;
part from curiosity, part from desire of preferment, and part from
attachment to those that were already gone before them. These last were
formed into a body of infantry of 600 men, and the command given to a
Galla, whose name was Woosheka; so that the regency, in the person of
the queen, seemed to have gained fresh force from the minority of the
young king Joas, as yet perfectly subject to his mother.

There were four bodies of household troops absolutely devoted to the
king’s will. One of these, the Koccob horse, was commanded by a young
Armenian not 30 years of age. He had been left in Abyssinia by his
father in Yasous’s time, and care had been taken of him by the Greeks.
Yasous had distinguished him by several places while a mere youth, and
employed him in errands to Masuah and Arabia, by which he became known
to Ras Michael. Upon the death of Yasous, the Iteghè put him about her
grandson Joas, as Baalomal, which is, _gentleman of the bed-chamber_,
or, _companion to the king_. He then became Asaleffa el Camisha, which
means _groom of the stole_, but at last was promoted to the great
place of Billetana Gueta Dakakin, _chamberlain_, or _master of the
household_, the third post in government, by which he took place of all
the governors of provinces while in Gondar.

There is no doubt Joas would have made him Ras, if he had reigned as
long as his father. Besides his own language, he understood Turkish,
Arabic, and Malabar, and was perfect master of the Tigré. But his
great excellence was his knowledge of Amharic, which he was thought to
speak as chastely and elegantly as Ras Michael himself. He is reported
likewise to have possessed a species of jurisprudence, whence derived
I never knew, which so pleased the Abyssinians, that the judges often
requested his attendance on the king; at which time he sat at the head
of the table, where it is supposed the king would place himself did he
appear personally in judgment, (which, as it may be learned from divers
places in this history, he never does); certain mornings in the week,
therefore, he sat publicly in the market-place, and gave judgment soon
after the break of day.

I saw this young man with his father at Loheia. He understood no
European language; was just then returned from India, and had a
considerable quantity of diamonds, and other precious stones, to
sell. He spoke with tears in his eyes of Abyssinia, from which he was
banished, and urged that I should take him there with me. But I had
too much at stake to charge myself with the consequences of anybody’s
behaviour but my own, and therefore refused it.

The great favour the Galla were in at court encouraged many of their
countrymen to follow them; and, by the king’s desire, two of his uncles
were sent for, and they not only came, but brought with them a thousand
horse. These were two young men, brothers of the queen Wobit, just now
dead. The eldest was named Brulhé, the younger Lubo. In an instant,
nothing was heard in the palace but Galla. The king himself affected to
speak nothing else. He had entirely intrusted the care of his person
to his two uncles; and, both being men of intrigue, they thought
themselves sufficiently capable to make a party, support it, and place
the king at the head of it; and this they effected as soon as it was
conceived, whilst the Abyssinians saw, with the utmost detestation and
abhorrence, a Gallan and inimical government erected in the very heart
or metropolis of their country.

Woodage had been long governor of Amhara. He had succeeded Palambaras
Duré in Bacuffa’s time, when he had been promoted to the dignity of
Ras.

These two were heads of the only great families in Amhara, who took
that government as it were by rotation. Woodage, in one of the
excursions into Atbara, had made an Arab’s, or a Shepherd’s daughter,
prisoner, baptized her, and lived with her as his mistress. The
passion Woodage bore to this fair slave was not, however, reciprocal.
She had fixed her affections upon his eldest son, and their frequent
familiarities at last brought about the discovery. This very much
shocked Woodage; but, instead of having recourse to public justice, he
called his brothers, and some other heads of his family before him, and
examined into the fact with them, desiring his son to defend himself.
The crime was clearly proved in all its circumstances. Upon which
Woodage, by his own authority, condemned his son to death; and not only
so, but caused his sentence to be put in execution, by hanging the
young man over a beam in his own house. As for the slave, he released
her, as not being bound to any return of affection to him, from whom
she had only received evil, and been deprived of her natural liberty.

It seems this claim of _patria potestas_ was new in Abyssinia; and
Bacuffa took it so ill, that he deprived Woodage of his office, and
banished him to Amhara, then governed by Palambaras Duré. To this loss
of influence another circumstance contributed. He was a relation of
Yasous’s first wife, who, by the Iteghé’s intrigues, had been sent
with her two sons to the mountain of Wechné, and Joas, a young son of
Yasous, preferred in their places.

It happened that Palambaras Duré died; and as the succession fell
regularly upon the unpopular Woodage, the king’s uncle, Lubo obtained
a promise of the government of Amhara for himself. All Gondar was
shocked at this strange choice: Amitzo and his Edjow were already upon
the southern frontiers of that province, domiciled there; and there
was no doubt but this nomination would put Amhara into his possession
for ever. All the inhabitants of Gondar were ready to run to their
arms to oppose this appointment of the king; and it was thought that,
underhand, the Iteghè fomented this dissatisfaction. The king, however,
terrified by the violent resentment of the populace, at the instance of
Ras Welled de l’Oul, recalled his nomination.

At this time Michael, who saw the consequence of these disputes, but
abstained from taking any share, because he knew that both parties were
promoting his interest by their mutual animosity, came to Gondar in
great pomp, upon an honourable errand.

Baady, son of l’Oul, king of Funge, or, as they are called in the
Abyssinian annals, Noba[96], who had defeated Yasous at Sennaar, after
a tyrannical and bloody reign of thirty-three years, was deposed in
1764 by Nasser his son, whom his minister Shekh Adelan, with his
brother Abou Kalec, governor of Kordofan, had put in his place; and
Baady had fled to Suhul Michael, whose fame was extended all over
Atbara. Michael received him kindly, promised him his best services
with Joas, and that he would march in person to Sennaar, and reinstate
him with an army, if the king should so command.

Michael conducted him into the presence of the king, where, in a
manner unbecoming a sovereign, and which Joas’s successor would not
have permitted, he kissed the ground, and declared himself a vassal
of Abyssinia. The king assigned him a large revenue, and put him in
possession of the government of Ras el Feel upon the frontier of
Sennaar, where Ras Welled de l’Oul advised him to wait patiently till
the dissensions that then prevailed at court were quieted, when Michael
should have orders to reinstate him in his kingdom. This was a wise
counsel, but he to whom it was given was not wise, and therefore did
not follow it. After some short stay at Ras el Feel he was decoyed from
this place of refuge by the intrigues of Adelan, and brought to trust
himself in Atbara, where he was betrayed and taken prisoner by Welled
Hassen, Shekh of Teawa, and murdered by him in Teawa privately, as we
shall hereafter see, two years after his flight from Gondar.

At this time, Ras Welled de l’Oul’s death was a signal for all parties
to engage. Nothing had withheld them but his prudence and authority;
and from that time began a scene of civil blood, which has continued
ever since, was in its full vigour at the time when I was in Abyssinia,
and without any prospect that it would ever have an end.

The great degree of power to which the brothers and their Galla
arrived; the great affection the king shewed to them, owing to their
having early infected him with their bloody and faithless principles,
gave great alarm to the queen and her relations, whose influence they
were every day diminishing. The last stroke, the death of Welled
de l’Oul, seemed to be a fatal one, and to threaten the entire
dissolution of her power. In order to counterbalance this, they
associated to their party and council Mariam Barea, who had lately
married Ozoro Esther, and was in possession of the second province
in the state for riches and for power, and greatly increased in its
importance by the officer that commanded it. Upon the death of Welled
de l’Oul, the principal fear the party of the Galla had was, that
Mariam Barea should be brought to Gondar as Ras. The union between him
and Kasmati Eshtè, formerly as strong by inclination as now it was by
blood, put them in terror for their very existence, and a stroke was to
be struck at all hazards that was to separate these interests for ever.

Eshte, upon taking possession of the province of Damot, found the
Djawi, established upon the frontiers of the province, very much
inclined to revolt. Notwithstanding peace had been established among
the Agows ever since Nanna Georgis had been defeated at the last
battle, the Galla had still continued to rob and distress them,
contrary to the public faith that had been pledged to them.

Eshte was too honest a man to suffer this; but the truth was, the Djawi
had felt the advantage of having a man like the late Waragna governor
of Damot; and they wanted, by all means, to reduce the ministers to the
necessity of making that command hereditary in his family, by Fasil his
son being preferred to succeed him.

This Fasil, whom I shall hereafter call Waragna Fasil, a name which
was given to distinguish him from many other Fasils in the army, was a
man then about twenty-two, whom Eshté had kept about him in a private
station, and had lately given him a subaltern command among his own
countrymen, the Djawi of Damot. From the services that he had then
rendered, it was expected a greater preferment was to follow.

The insolence of the Djawi had come to such a pitch that they had
offered Eshté battle; but they had fled with very little resistance,
and been driven over the Nile to their countrymen whence they came.
Eshté, roused from his indolence, now shewed himself the gallant
soldier that he really was. He crossed the Nile at a place never
attempted before; and though he lost a considerable number of men
in the passage, yet that disadvantage was more than compensated by
the advantage it gave him of falling upon the Galla unexpectedly. He
therefore destroyed, or dispersed several tribes of them, possessed
himself of their crops, drove off their cattle, wives, and children,
and obliged them to sue for peace on his own terms; and then repassed
the Nile, re-establishing the Djawi, after submission, in their ancient
possessions.

Upon news of Welled de l’Oul’s death, and the known intention of the
queen that Eshté should succeed him in the office of Ras, he was
mustering his soldiers to march to Gondar: Damot, the Agows, Goutto,
and Maitsha, all readily joined him from every quarter; and Waragna
Fasil had been sent to bring in the Djawi with the rest. Eshtè had
marched by slow journies from Buré, slenderly attended, to arrive at
Goutto the place of rendezvous; and, being come to Fagitta, in his
way thither, he encamped upon a plain there, near to the church of St
George.

It was in the evening, when news were brought him that the whole Djawi
had come out, to a man, from goodwill, to attend him to Gondar. This
mark of kindness had very much pleased him; and he looked upon it
as a grateful return for his mild treatment of them after they were
vanquished. A stool was set in the shade, without a small house where
he then was lodged, that he might see the troops pass; when Hubna
Fasil, a Galla, who commanded them, availing himself of the privilege
of approaching near, always customary upon these occasions, run him
through the body with a lance, and threw him dead upon the ground. The
rest of the Galla fell immediately upon all his attendants, put them to
flight, and proclaimed Waragna Fasil governor of Damot and the Agows.

This intelligence was immediately sent to their countrymen, Brulhé and
Lubo, at Gondar, who prevailed upon the king to confirm Waragna Fasil
in his command, though purchased with the murder of the worthiest man
in his dominions, who was his own uncle, brother to the Iteghè; and
this was thought to more than counterbalance the accession of strength
the queen’s party had received from the marriage of Ozoro Esther with
Mariam Barea.

In critical times like these, the greatest events are produced from the
smallest accidents. Ayo, father to Mariam Barea, had always been upon
bad terms with Michael. It was at first emulation between two great
men; but, after Ayo had assisted the king in taking Michael prisoner
at the mountain Samayat, this emulation had degenerated into perfect
hatred on the part of Michael.

Just before Kasmati Ayo had resigned Begemder to his son, and retired
to private life, two servants of Michael had fled with two swords,
which they used to carry before him, claiming the protection of Kasmati
Ayo. Michael had claimed them before the king, who, loath to determine
between the two, not being at that time instigated by Galla, had
accepted the proposal of Michael to have the matter of right tried
before the judges; but, upon his resignation of the province, and
retiring, the thing had blown over and been forgotten.

Soon after this accession of Mariam Barea, Michael intimated to him
the order the king had given that the judges should try the matter
of difference between them. Mariam Barea refused this, and upbraided
Michael with meanness and prostitution of the dignity he bore, to
consent to submit himself to the venal judgment of weak old men, whose
consciences were hackneyed in prejudice or partiality, and always
known to be under the influence of party. He put Suhul Michael in
mind also, that, being both of them the king’s lieutenant-generals,
representatives of his person in the provinces they governed, noble by
birth, and soldiers by profession, they had no superior but God and
their sovereign, therefore it was below them to acknowledge or receive
any judgment between them unless from God, by an appeal to the sword,
or from the king, by a sentence intimated to them by a proper officer;
that Suhul Michael might choose either of these manners of deciding the
difference as should seem best unto him; and if he chose the latter,
of abiding by the sentence of the king, he would then restore him the
swords upon the king’s first command, but he despised the judges, and
disowned their jurisdiction.

This spirited answer was magnified into the crime of disobedience and
rebellion. Michael pursued it no further. He knew it was in good hands,
which, when once the matter was set agoing, would never let it drop.
Accordingly, to every one’s surprise but Michael’s, a proclamation
was made, that the king had deprived Mariam Barea of his government
for disobedience, and had given it to Kasmati Brulhé his uncle, now
governor of Begemder.

All Abyssinia was in a ferment at this promotion. The number, power,
and vicinity of that race of Galla being considered, this was but
another way of giving the richest and strongest barrier of Abyssinia
into the hands of his hereditary and bloody enemy. There could be no
doubt, indeed, but that, as soon as Brulhé should have taken possession
of his government, it would be instantly over-run by the united force
of that savage and Pagan nation; and there was nothing afterwards to
avert danger from the metropolis, for the boundaries of Begemder reach
within a very short day’s journey of Gondar.

Mariam Barea, one of the noblest in point of birth in the country where
he lived, setting every private consideration aside, was too good a
citizen to suffer a measure so pernicious to take place quietly in his
time, while the province was under his command. But, besides this,
he considered himself as degraded and materially hurt both in honour
and in interest, and very sensibly felt the affront of being, himself
and his kindred, subjected to a race of Pagans whom he had so often
overthrown in the field.

The king’s army marched, under the command of his uncle Brulhé, to take
possession of his government; it was with much difficulty, indeed, that
Joas could be kept from appearing in person, but he was left under the
inspection and tuition of his uncle Lubo, at Gondar. Brulhé made very
slow advances; his army several times assembled, as often disbanded
of itself; and near a year was spent before he could move from his
camp on the lake Tzana, with a force capable of shewing or maintaining
itself in Begemder, from the frontiers of which he was not half a day’s
journey.

Mariam Barea remained all this time inactive in Begemder, attending to
the ordinary duties of his office, with a perfect contempt of Brulhé
and his proceedings. But, in the interim, he left no means untried
to pacify the king, and dissuade him from a measure he saw would be
ruinous to the state in general.

Mariam Barea, though young, had the prudence and behaviour of a man
of advanced years. He was esteemed, without comparison, the bravest
soldier and best general in the kingdom, except old Suhul Michael, his
hereditary rival and enemy. But his manners were altogether different
from those of Michael. He was open, chearful, and unreserved; liberal,
even to excess, but not from any particular view of gaining reputation
by it; as moderate in the use of victory as indefatigable to obtain it;
temperate in all his pleasures; easily brought to forgive, and that
forgivenness always sincere; a steady observer of his word, even in
trifles; and distinguished for two things very uncommon in Abyssinia,
regularity in his devotions, and constancy to one wife, which never was
impeached. In his last remonstrance, after many professions of his
duty and obedience, he put the king in mind, that, at his investiture,
“The laws of the country imposed upon him an oath which he took in
presence of his majesty, and, after receiving the holy sacrament, that
he was not to suffer any Galla in Begemder, but rather, if needful, die
with sword in hand to prevent it; that he considered the contravening
that oath as a deliberate breach of the allegiance which he owed to God
and to his sovereign, and of the trust reposed in him by his country;
that the safety of the princes of the royal family, sequestered upon
the mountain of Wechné, depended upon the observance of this oath;
that otherwise they would be in constant danger of being extirpated
by Pagans, as they had already nearly been in former ages, at two
different times, upon the rocks Damo and Geshen; he begged the king,
if, unfortunately, he could not be reconciled to him, to give his
command to Kasmati Geta, Kasmati Eusebius, or any Abyssinian nobleman,
in which case he would immediately resign, and retire to private life
with his old father.”

He concluded by saying, that, “As he had formed a resolution, he
thought it his duty to submit it to the king; that, if his majesty
was resolved to march and lead the army himself, he would retire till
he was stopt by the frontiers of the Galla, and the farthest limits
of Begemder; and, so far from molesting the army in their route, the
king might be assured, that, though his own men should be straitened,
abundance of every kind of provision and refreshment should be left in
his majesty’s route. But if, contrary to his wish, troops of Galla,
commanded by a Galla, should come to take possession of his province,
he would fight them at the well of Fernay[97], before one Galla should
drink there, or advance a pike-length into Begemder.”

This declaration was, by orders of Ras Michael, entered into the
Deftar, and written in letters of gold, after Mariam Barea’s death, no
doubt at the instigation of Ozoro Esther, jealous for the reputation
of her dead husband. It is intitled, _the dutiful declaration of the
governor of Begemder_; and is signed by two Umbares, or judges. Whether
the original was so or not, I cannot say.

The return made to this by the king was of the harshest kind, full of
taunts and scoffs, and presumptuous confidence; announcing the speedy
arrival of _Brulhé_, as to a certain victory; and, to shew what further
assistance he trusted in, he ordered Ras Michael to be proclaimed
governor of Samen, the province on the Gondar side of the Tacazzé, that
no obstacle might be left in the way of that general from Tigré, if it
should be resolved upon to call him.

In Abyssinia there is a kind of glass bottle, very light, and of the
size, shape, and strength of a Florence wine-flask; only the neck is
wider, like that of our glass decanters, twisted for ornament sake,
and the lips of it folded back, such as we call cannon-mouthed. These
are made at Trieste on the Adriatic; and thousands of packages of
these are brought from Arabia to Gondar, where they are in use for
all liquors, which are clear enough to bear the glass, such as wine
and spirits. They are very thin and fragil, and are called _brulhé_.
Mariam Barea, provoked at being so undervalued as he was in the king’s
message, returned only for answer, “Still the king had better take my
advice, and not send his _brulhé’s_ here; they are but weak, and the
rocks about Begemder hard; at any rate, they do right to move slowly,
otherwise they might break by the way.”

As soon as this defiance was reported to the king and his counsellors
all was in a flame, and orders given to march immediately. The whole
of the king’s household, consisting of 8000 veteran troops, were
ordered to join the army of Brulhé. This, tho’ it added to the display
of the army, contributed nothing to the real strength of it; for all,
excepting the Galla, were resolved neither to shed their own blood nor
that of their brethren, under the banners of so detested a leader.

This was not unknown to Mariam Barea; but neither the advantage
of the ground, the knowledge of Brulhé’s weakness, nor any other
consideration, could induce him to take one step, or harrass his enemy,
out of his own province; nor did he suffer a musket to be fired, or a
horse to charge, till Brulhé’s van was drawn up on the brink of the
well Fernay. After he had placed the horse of the province of Lasta
opposite to the Edjow Galla, against whom his design was, the armies
joined, and the king’s troops immediately gave way. The Edjow, however,
engaged fiercely and in great earnest with the horse of Lasta, an enemy
fully as cruel and savage as themselves, but much better horsemen,
better armed, and better soldiers. The moment the king’s troops turned
their backs, the trumpets from Mariam Barea’s army forbade the pursuit;
while the rest of the Begemder horse, who knew the intention of their
general, surrounded the Edjow, and cut them to pieces, though valiantly
fighting to the last man.

Brulhé fell, among the herd of his countrymen, not distinguished by any
action of valour. Mariam Barea had given the most express orders to
take him alive; or, if that could not be, to let him escape; but by no
means to kill him. But a menial servant of his, more willing to revenge
his master’s wrongs than adopt his moderation, forced his way through
the crowd of Galla, where he saw Brulhé fighting; and, giving him two
wounds through his body with a lance, left him dead upon the field,
bringing away his horse along with him to his master as a token of his
victory. Mariam Barea, upon hearing that Brulhé was dead, foresaw in a
moment what would infallibly be the consequence, and exclaimed in great
agitation, “Michael and all the army of Tigré will march against me
before autumn.”

He was not in this a false prophet; for no sooner was Brulhé’s defeat
and death known, than the king, from resentment, fear the fatal ruler
of weak minds, the constant instigation of Lubo, and the remnant of
Brulhé’s party, declared there was no safety but in Ras Michael.
An express was therefore immediately sent to him, commanding his
attendance, and conferring upon him the office of Ras, by which he
became invested with supreme power, both civil and military. This was
an event Michael had long wished for. He had nearly as long foreseen
that it must happen, and would involve both king and queen, and their
respective parties, equally in destruction; but he had not spent his
time merely in reflection, he had made every preparation possible,
and was ready. So soon then as he received the king’s orders, he
prepared to march from Adowa with 26,000 men, all the best soldiers in
Abyssinia, about 10,000 of whom were armed with firelocks.

It happened that two Azages, and several other great officers, were
sent to him into Tigré with these orders, and to invest him with the
government of Samen. Upon their mentioning the present situation of
affairs, Michael sharply reflected upon the king’s conduct, and that
of those who had counselled him, which must end in the ruin of his
family and the state in general. He highly extolled Mariam Barea as the
only man in Abyssinia that knew his duty, and had courage to persevere
in it. As for himself, being the king’s servant, he would obey his
commands, whatever they were, faithfully, and to the letter; but, as
holding now the first place in council, he must plainly tell him the
ruin of Mariam Barea would be speedily and infallibly followed by that
of his country.

After this declaration, Michael decamped with his army encumbered by no
baggage, not even provisions, women, or tents, nor useless beasts of
burden. His soldiers, attentive only to the care of their arms, lived
freely and licentiously upon the miserable countries through which they
passed, and which they laid wholly waste as if belonging to an enemy.

He advanced, by equal, steady, and convenient marches, in diligence,
but not in haste. Not content with the subsistence of his troops,
he laid a composition of money upon all those districts within a
day’s march of the place through which he passed; and, upon this not
being readily complied with, he burnt the houses to the ground, and
slaughtered the inhabitants. Woggora, the granary of Gondar, full of
rich large towns and villages, was all on fire before him; and that
capital was filled with the miserable inhabitants, stript of every
thing, flying before Ras Michael as before an army of Pagans. The
king’s understanding was now restored to him for an instant; he saw
clearly the mischief his warmth had occasioned, and was truly sensible
of the rash step he had taken by introducing Michael. But the dye was
cast; repentance was no longer in season; his all was at stake, and he
was tied to abide the issue.

Michael, with his army in order of battle, approached Gondar with a
very warlike appearance. He descended from the high lands of Woggora
into the valleys which surround the capital, and took possession of the
rivers Kahha and Angrab, which run through these valleys, and which
alone supply Gondar with water. He took post at every entrance into the
town, and every place commanding those entrances, as if he intended to
besiege it. This conduct struck all degrees of people with terror, from
the king and queen down to the lowest inhabitant. All Gondar passed
an anxious night, fearing a general massacre in the morning; or that
the town would be plundered, or laid under some exorbitant ransom,
capitation, or tribute.

But this was not the real design of Michael; he intended to terrify,
but to do no more. He entered Gondar early in the morning, and did
homage to the king in the most respectful manner. He was invested with
the charge of Ras by Joas himself; and from the palace, attended
by two hundred soldiers, and all the people of note in the town, he
went straight to take possession of the house which is particularly
appropriated to his office, and sat down in judgment with the doors
open.

Marauding parties of soldiers had entered at several parts of the town,
and begun to use that licence they had been accustomed to on their
march, pilfering and plundering houses, or persons that seemed without
protection. Upon the first complaints, as he rode through the town, he
caused twelve of the delinquents to be apprehended, and hanged upon
trees in the streets, sitting upon his mule till he saw the execution
performed. After he had arrived at his house, and was seated, these
executions were followed by above fifty others in different quarters of
Gondar. That same day he established four excellent officers in four
quarters of the town. The first was Kefla Yasous, a man of the greatest
worth, whom I shall frequently mention as a friend in the course of my
history; the second, Billetana Gueta Welleta Michael, that is, first
master of the household to the king. He had given that old officer that
office, upon superseding Lubo the king’s uncle, without any consent
asked or given. He was a man of a very morose turn, with whom I was
never connected. The third was Billetana Gueta Tecla, his sister’s
son, a man of very great worth and merit, who had the soft and gentle
manners of Amhara joined to the determined courage of the Tigran.

Michael took upon himself the charge of the fourth district. He did
not pretend by this to erect a military government in Gondar; on the
contrary, these officers were only appointed to give force to the
sentences and proceedings of the civil judges, and had not deliberation
in any cause out of the camp. But two Umbares, or judges, of the twelve
were obliged to attend each of the three districts; two were left in
the king’s house, and four had their chamber of judicature in his.

The citizens, upon this fair aspect of government, where justice
and power united to protect them, dismissed all their fears, became
calm and reconciled to Michael the second day after his arrival, and
only regretted that they had been in anarchy, and strangers to his
government so long.

The third day after his arrival he held a full council in presence of
the king. He sharply rebuked both parties in a speech of considerable
length, in which he expressed much surprise, that both king and queen,
after the experience of so many years, had not discovered that they
were equally unfit to govern a kingdom, and that it was impossible to
keep distant provinces in order, when they paid such inattention to
the police of the metropolis. Great part of this speech applied to the
king, who, with the Iteghè and Galla, were in a balcony as usual, in
the same room, though at some distance, and above the table where the
council sat, but within convenient hearing.

The troubled state, the destruction of Woggora, and the insecurity of
the roads from Damot, had made a famine in Gondar. The army possessed
both the rivers, and suffered no supply of water to be brought into the
town, but allowed two jars for each family twice a-day, and broke them
when they returned for more[98].

Ras Michael, at his rising from council, ordered a loaf of bread, a
brulhé of water, and an ounce of gold, all articles portable enough to
be exposed in the market-place, upon the head of a drum, without any
apparent watching. But tho’ the Abyssinians are thieves of the first
rate, tho’ meat and drink were very scarce in the town, and gold still
scarcer, though a number of strangers came into it with the army, and
the nights were almost constantly twelve hours long, nobody ventured to
attempt the removing any of the three articles that, from the Monday
to the Friday, had been exposed night and day in the market-place
unguarded.

All the citizens, now surrounded with an army, found the security and
peace they before had been strangers to, and every one deprecated
the time when the government should pass out of such powerful
hands. All violent oppressors, all those that valued themselves as
leaders of parties, saw, with an indignation which they durst not
suffer to appear, that they were now at last dwindled into absolute
insignificance.

Having settled things upon this basis, Ras Michael next prepared to
march out for the war of Begemder; and he summoned, under the severest
penalties, all the great officers to attend him with all the forces
they could raise. He insisted likewise that the king himself should
march, and refused to let a single soldier stay behind him in Gondar;
not that he wanted the assistance of those troops, or trusted to them,
but he saw the destruction of Mariam Barea was resolved on, and he
wished to throw the odium of it on the king. He affected to say of
himself, that he was but the instrument of the king and his party, and
had no end of his own to attain. He expatiated, upon all occasions,
upon the civil and military virtues of Mariam Barea; said, that he
himself was old, and that the king should walk coolly and cautiously,
and consider the value that officer would be of to his posterity and to
the nation when he should be no more.

Upon the first news of the king’s marching, Mariam Barea, who was
encamped upon the frontiers near where he defeated Brulhé, fell back
to Garraggara the middle of Begemder. The king followed with apparent
intention of coming to a battle without loss of time; and Mariam Barea,
by his behaviour, shewed in what different lights he viewed an army, at
the head of which was his sovereign, and one commanded by a Galla.

No such moderation was shewn on the king’s part. His army burnt and
destroyed the whole country through which they passed. It was plain
that it was Joas’s intention to revenge the death of Brulhé upon the
province itself, as well as upon Mariam Barea. As for Ras Michael,
the behaviour of the king’s army had nothing in it new, or that could
either surprise or displease him. Friend as he was to peace and good
order at home, his invariable rule was to indulge his soldiers in
every licence that the most profligate mind could wish to commit when
marching against an enemy.

It was known the armies were to engage at Nefas Musa, because Mariam
Barea had said he would fight Brulhé, to prevent him entering the
province, but retreat before the king till he could no longer avoid
going out of it. The king then marched upon the tract of Mariam Barea,
burning and destroying on each side of him, as wide as possible, by
detachments and scouring parties. Allo Fasil, an officer of the king’s
household, a man of low birth, of very moderate parts, and one who used
to divert the king as a kind of buffoon, otherwise a good soldier, had,
as a favour, obtained a small party of horse, with which he ravaged the
low country of Begemder.

The reader will remember, in the beginning of this history, that a
singular revolution happened, in as singular a manner, the usurper
of the house of Zaguè having voluntarily resigned the throne to the
kings of the line of Solomon, who for several hundred years had been
banished to Shoa. Tecla Haimanout, founder of the monastery of Debra
Libanos, a saint, and the last Abyssinian that enjoyed the dignity of
Abuna, had the address and influence to bring about this revolution,
or resignation, and to restore the ancient line of kings. A treaty
was made under guarantee of the Abuna, that large portions of Lasta
should be given to this prince of the house of Zaguè, free from all
tribute, tax, or service whatever, and that he should be regarded as
an independent prince. The treaty being concluded, the prince of Zaguè
was put in possession of his lands, and was called Y’Lasta Hatzè, which
signifies, not the king of Lasta, but _the king_ at or in Lasta[99].
He resigned the throne, and Icon Amlac of the line of Solomon, by the
queen of Saba, continued the succession of princes of that house.

That treaty, greatly to the honour of the contracting parties, made
towards the end of the 13th century, had remained inviolate till the
middle of the 18th; no affront or injustice had been offered to the
prince of Zaguè, and in the number of rebellions which had happened, by
princes setting up their claims to the crown, none had ever proceeded,
or in any shape been abetted, by the house of Zaguè, even though Lasta
had been so frequently in rebellion.

As Joas was a young prince, now for the first time in the province of
Begemder and passing not far from his domains, the prince of Zaguè
thought it a proper civility and duty to salute the king in his
passage, and congratulate him upon his accession to the throne of
his father. He accordingly presented himself to Joas in the habit of
peace, while, according to treaty, his kettle-drums, or nagareets, were
silver, and the points of his guard’s spears of that metal also. The
king received him with great cordiality and kindness; treated him with
the utmost respect and magnificence; refused to allow him to prostrate
himself on the ground, and forced him to sit in his presence. Michael
went still farther; upon his entering his tent he uncovered himself
to his waist, in the same manner as he would have done in presence of
Joas. He received him standing, obliged him to sit in his own chair,
and excused himself for using the same liberty of sitting, only on
account of his own lameness.

The king halted one entire day to feast this royal guest. He was an old
man of few words, but those very inoffensive, lively, and pleasant;
in short, Ras Michael, not often accustomed to fix on favourites at
first sight, was very much taken with this Lasta sovereign. Magnificent
presents were made on all sides; the prince of Zaguè took his leave and
returned; and the whole army was very much pleased and entertained at
this specimen of the good faith and integrity of their kings.

He had now considerably advanced through his own country, Lasta, which
was in the rear, when he was met by Allo Fasil returning from his
plundering the low country, who, without provocation, from motives
of pride or avarice, fell unawares upon the innocent, old man, whose
attendants, secure, as they thought, under public faith, and accoutred
for parade and not for defence, became an easy sacrifice, the prince
being the first killed by Allo Fasil’s own hand.

Fasil continued his march to join the king, beating his silver
kettle-drums as in triumph. The day after, Ras Michael, uninformed of
what had passed, inquired who that was marching with a nagareet in
his rear? as it is not allowed to any other person but governors of
provinces to use that instrument; and they had already reached the
camp. The truth was presently told; at which the Ras shewed the deepest
compunction. The tents were already pitched when Fasil arrived, who,
riding into Michael’s tent, as is usual with officers returning from
an expedition, began to brag of his own deeds, and upbraided Michael,
in a strain of mockery, that he was old, lame, and impotent.

This raillery, though very common on such occasions, was not then
in season; and the last part of the charge against him was the most
offensive, for there was no man more fond of the sex than Michael was.
The Ras, therefore, ordered his attendants to pull Fasil off his horse,
who, seeing that he was fallen into a scrape, fled to the king’s tent
for refuge, with violent complaints against Michael. The king undertook
to reconcile him to the Ras, and sent the young Armenian, commander
of the black horse, to desire Michael to forgive Allo Fasil. This he
absolutely refused to do, alledging, that the passing over Fasil’s
insolence to himself would be of no use, as his life was forfeited for
the death of the prince of Zaguè.

The king renewed his request by another messenger; for the Armenian
excused himself from going, by saying boldly to the king, That, by the
law of all nations, the murderer should die. To the second request the
king added, that he required only his forgivenness of his insolence
to him, not of the death of the prince of Zaguè, as he would direct
what should be done when the nearest of kin claimed the satisfaction
of retaliation. To this Ras Michael shortly replied, “I am here to
do justice to every one, and will do it without any consideration or
respect of persons.” And it was now, for the first time, Abyssinia ever
saw a king solicit the life of a subject of his own from one of his
servants, and be refused.

The king, upon this, ordered Allo Fasil to defend himself; and things
were upon this footing, the affair likely to end in oblivion, though
not by forgivenness. But, a very short time after, the prince of
Zaguè’s eldest son came privately to Michael’s tent in the night; and,
the next morning, when the judges were in his tent, Michael sent his
door-keeper (Hagos) reckoned the bravest and most fortunate in combat
of any private man in the army, and to whom he trusted the keeping of
his tent-door, to order Allo Fasil to answer at the instance of the
prince of Zaguè, then waiting him in court, Why he had murdered the
prince his father? Fasil was astonished, and refused to come: being
again cited in a regular manner by Hagos, he seemed desirous to avail
himself of the king’s permission to defend himself, and call together
his friends. Hagos, without giving him time, thrust him through with
a lance; then cut off his head, and carried it to Michael’s tent,
repeating what passed, and the reason of his killing him.

As a refusal in all such instances is rebellion, this had passed
according to rule: a party of Tigrans was ordered to plunder his
tent; and all the ill-got spoils which he had gained from the poor
inhabitants of Begemder were abandoned to the soldiers. Fasil’s head
was given to the prince of Zaguè, as a reparation for the treaty being
violated; the silver nagareet and spears were returned; and, highly
as this affair had been carried by Ras Michael, the king never after
mentioned a word of it. But this was universally allowed to be the
first cause of their disagreement.

Mariam Barea, seeing no other way to save his province from ruin but by
bringing the affair to a short issue, resolved likewise to keep his
promise. He retired to Nefas Musa, and encamped in the farthest limits
of his province: behind this are the Woollo Galla, relations of Amitzo
the king’s parents. Joas and Ras Michael followed him without delay,
and, having called in all the out-posts, both sides prepared for an
engagement.

About nine in the morning, Mariam Barea presented his army in order
of battle. Michael had given orders to Kefla Yasous and Welleta
Michael how to form his. He then mounted his mule, and with some of
his officers rode out to view Mariam Barea’s disposition. The king,
anxious about the fortune of the day, and terrified at some reports
that had been made him, by timid, or unskilful people, of the warlike
countenance of Mariam Barea’s army, sent to the Ras, whom he saw
reconnoitring, to know his opinion of what was likely to happen. “Tell
the king,” says the veteran, “that a young man like him, fighting with
a subject so infinitely below him, with an army double his number,
should give him fair play for his life and reputation. He should send
to Mariam Barea to encrease the strength of his center by placing the
troops of Lasta there, or we shall beat him in half an hour, without
either honour to him or to ourselves.” The king, however, did not
understand that sort of gallantry; he thought half an hour in suspence
was long enough, and he ordered immediately a large body of musquetry
to reinforce Fasil, who commanded the center, and thereby he weakened
his own right wing.

Michael, who commanded the right of the royal army, had placed himself
and his fire-arms in very rough ground, where cavalry could not
approach him, and where he fired as from a citadel, and soon obliged
the left wing of the rebels to retreat. But the king, Kefla Yasous,
and Lubo on the right, were roughly handled by the horse of Lasta, and
would have been totally defeated, the king and Lubo having already left
the field, had not Kefla Yasous brought up a reinforcement of the men
of Siré and Temben, and retrieved the day, at least brought things upon
an equal footing.

Fasil, with the horse of Foggora and Damot, and a prodigious body
of the Djawi and Pagan Galla, desirous to shew his consequence, and
confirm himself in his ill-got government by his personal behaviour,
attacked the Begemder horse in the center so irresistibly, that
he not only broke through them in several places, but threw the
whole body into a shameful flight. Mariam Barea himself was wounded
in endeavouring to stop them, and hurried away, in spite of his
inclination, crying out in great agony, “Is there not one in my army
that will stay and see me die like the son of Kasmati Ayo?” It was all
in vain; Powussen, and a number of his own officers, surrounding him,
dragged him as it were by force out of the field. The country behind
Nefas Musa is wild, and cut with deep gullies, and the woods almost
impenetrable; they were therefore quickly out of the enemy’s pursuit,
and safe, as they thought, under the protection of the Woollo Galla.
The whole army of Begemder was dispersed, and Michael early forbade
further pursuit.

The account of this battle, and what preceded it, from the murder of
the prince of Zaguè, is not in the annals or history of Abyssinia,
which I have hitherto followed; at least it has not appeared yet,
probably out of delicacy to Ozoro Esther, fear of Ras Michael, and
respect to the character of Mariam Barea, whose memory is still dear to
his country. But the whole was often, at my desire, repeated to me by
Kefla Yasous, and his officers who were there, whom he used to question
about any circumstance he did not himself remember, or was absent from;
for he was a scrupulous lover of truth; and nothing pleased him so much
as the thought that I was writing his history to be read in my country,
although he had not the smallest idea of England or its situation.

As for the conversation before the battle, it was often told me by Ayto
Aylo and Ayto Engedan, sons of Kasmati Eshté, who were with the Ras
when he delivered the message to the king, and were kept by him from
engaging that day in respect to Mariam Barea, who was married to their
aunt Ozoro Esther.

The king and Lubo sent Woosheka to their friends among the Woollo, who
delivered up the unfortunate Mariam Barea, with twelve of his officers
who had taken refuge with him. Mariam Barea was brought before the king
in his tent, covered with blood that had flowed from his wound; his
hands tied behind his back, and thus thrown violently with his face to
the ground. A general murmur which followed shewed the sentiments of
the spectators at so woful a sight; and the horror of it seemed to have
seized the king so entirely as to deprive him of all other sentiments.

I have often said, the Mosaical law, or law of retaliation, is
constantly observed over all Abyssinia as the criminal law of the
country, so that, when any person is slain wrongfully by another, it
does not belong to the king to punish that offence, but the judges
deliver the offender to the nearest relation of the party murdered, who
has the full power of putting him to death, selling him to slavery, or
pardoning him without any satisfaction.

Lubo saw the king relenting, and that the greatest crime, that of
rebellion, was already forgiven. He stood up, therefore, and, in
violent rage, laid claim to Mariam Barea as the murderer of his
brother: the king still saying nothing, he and his other Galla hurried
Mariam Barea to his tent, where he was killed, according to report,
with sundry circumstances of private cruelty, afterwards looked upon
as great aggravations. Lubo, with his own hand, is said to have cut
his throat in the manner they kill sheep. His body was afterwards
disfigured with many wounds, and his head severed and carried to
Michael, who forbade uncovering it in his tent. It was then sent to
Brulhé’s family in their own country, as a proof of the satisfaction
his friends had obtained; and this gave more universal umbrage than did
even the cruelty of the execution.

Several officers of the king’s army, seeing the bloody intentions of
the Galla, advised Powussen, and the eleven other officers that were
taken prisoners, to make the best use of the present opportunity, and
fly to the tent of Michael and implore his protection. This they most
willingly did, with this connivance of Woosheka, who had been intrusted
with the care of them, and Lubo having finished Mariam Barea, came
to the king’s tent to seek the unhappy prisoners, whom he intended
as victims to the memory of Brulhé likewise. Hearing, however, that
they were fled to Michael’s tent, he sent Woosheka to demand them;
but that officer had scarce opened his errand, in the gentlest manner
possible, when Michael, in a fury, cried out, Cut him in pieces before
the tent-door. Woosheka was indeed lucky enough to escape; but we shall
find this was not forgot, for his punishment was more than doubled soon
afterwards.

At seeing Mariam Barea’s head in the hands of a Galla, after
forbidding him to expose it in his tent, Michael is said to have made
the following observation: “Weak and cowardly people are always in
proportion cruel and unmerciful. If Brulhé’s wife had done this, I
could have forgiven her; but for Joas, a young man and a king, whose
heart should be opened and elated with a first victory, to be partaker
with the Galla, the enemies of his country, in the murder of a nobleman
such as Mariam Barea, it is a prodigy, and can be followed by no good
to himself or the state; and I am much deceived if the day is not at
hand when he shall curse the moment that ever Galla crossed the Nile,
and look for a man such as Mariam Barea, but he shall not find him.”
And, indeed, Michael was very well entitled to make this prophecy,
for he knew his own heart, and the designs he had now ready to put in
execution.

It is no wonder that these free communications gave the king reason to
distrust Michael. And it was observed that Waragna Fasil had insinuated
himself far into his favour: his late behaviour at the battle of
Nefas Musa had greatly increased his importance with the king; and
the number of troops he had now with him made Joas think himself
independent of the Ras. Fasil had brought with him near 30,000 men,
about 20,000 of whom were horsemen, wild Pagan Galla, from Bizamo and
other nations south of the Nile. The terror the savages occasioned
in the countries through which they passed, and the great disorders
they committed, gave Ras Michael a pretence to insist that all those
wild Galla should be sent back to their own country. I say this was
a pretence, because Michael’s soldiers were really more cruel and
licentious, because more confident and better countenanced than these
strangers were. But the war was over, the armies to be disbanded, these
Pagans were consequently to return home; and they were all sent back
accordingly, excepting 12,000 Djawi, men of Fasil’s own tribe, and some
of the best horse of Maitsha, Agow, and Damot.

This was the first appearance of quarrel between Fasil and Ras Michael.
But other accidents followed fast that blew up the flame betwixt them;
of which the following was by much the most remarkable, and the most
unexpected.

At Nefas Musa, near to the field of battle, was a house of Mariam
Barea, which he used to remove to when he was busy in wars with
the neighbouring Galla. It was surrounded with meadows perfectly
well-watered, and full of luxuriant grass. Fasil, for the sake of his
cavalry, had encamped in these meadows; or, if he had other views, they
are not known; and though all the doors and entrances of the house
were shut, yet within was the unfortunate Ozoro Esther, by this time
informed of her husband’s death, and with her was Ayto Aylo, a nobleman
of great credit, riches, and influence. He had been at the campaign of
Sennaar, and was so terrified at the defeat, that, on his return, he
had renounced the world, and turned monk. He was a man of no party, and
refused all posts or employments; but was so eminent for wisdom, that
all sides consulted him, and were in some measure governed by him.

This person, a relation of the Iteghé’s, had, at her desire, attended
Ozoro Esther to Nefas Musa, but, adhering to his vow, went not to
battle with her husband. Hearing, however, of the bad disposition of
the king, the cruelty of the Galla, and the power and ambition of
Fasil, whose soldiers were encamped round the house, he told her that
there was only one resolution which she could take to avoid sudden
ruin, and being made a sacrifice to one of the murderers of her husband.

This princess, under the fairest form, had the courage and decision of
a Roman matron, worthy the wife of Mariam Barea, to whom she had born
two sons. Instructed by Aylo, early in the morning, all covered from
head to foot, accompanied by himself, and many attendants and friends,
their heads bare, and without appearance of disguise, they presented
themselves at the door of Michael’s tent, and were immediately
admitted. Aylo announced the princess to the Ras, and she immediately
threw herself at his feet on the ground.

As Michael was lame, tho’ in all other respects healthy and vigorous,
and unprepared for so extraordinary an interview, it was some time
before he could get upon his feet and uncover himself before his
superior. This being at last accomplished, and Ozoro Esther refusing to
rise, Aylo, in a few words, told the Ras her resolution was to give him
instantly her hand, and throw herself under his protection, as that of
the only man not guilty of Mariam Barea’s death, who could save her and
her children from the bloody cruelty and insolence of the Galla that
surrounded her. Michael, sanguine as he was in his expectations of the
fruit he was to reap from his victory, did not expect so soon so fair a
sample of what was to follow.

To decide well, instantly upon the first view of things, was a talent
Michael possessed superior to any man in the kingdom. Tho’ Ozoro Esther
had never been part of his schemes, he immediately saw the great
advantage which would accrue to him by making her so, and he seized
it; and he was certain also that the king, in his present disposition,
would soon interfere. He lifted Ozoro Esther, and placed her upon his
seat; sent for Kefla Yasous and his other officers, and ordered them,
with the utmost expedition, to draw up his army in order of battle, as
if for a review to ascertain his loss. At the same time he sent for
a priest, and ordered separate tents to be pitched for Ozoro Esther
and her household. All this was performed quickly; then meeting her
with the priest, he was married to her at the door of his own tent in
midst of the acclamations of his whole army. The occasion of these loud
shouts was soon carried to the king, and was the first account he had
of this marriage. He received the information with violent displeasure,
which he could not stifle, or refrain from expressing it in the
severest terms, all of which were carried to Ras Michael by officious
persons, almost as soon as they were uttered, nothing softened.

The consequences of the marriage of Ozoro Esther were very soon seen
in the inveterate and determined hatred against the Galla. Esther,
who could not save Mariam Barea, sacrificed herself that she might
avenge his death, and live to see the loss of her husband expiated by
numberless hecatombs of his enemies and murderers. Mild, gentle, and
compassionate as, from my own knowledge, she certainly was, her nature
was totally changed when she cast back her eyes upon the sufferings of
her husband; nor could she be ever satiated with vengeance for those
sufferings, but constantly stimulated Ras Michael, of himself much
inclined to bloodshed, to extirpate, by every possible means, that
odious nation of Galla, by whom she had fallen from all her hopes of
happiness.

Fasil, as being a Galla, the first man that broke thro’ the horse of
Begemder, and wounded and put to flight her husband Mariam Barea, was
in consequence among the black list of her enemies. Fasil, too, had
murdered Kasmati Eshté, who was her favourite uncle, fast friend to
Mariam Barea, and the man that had promoted her marriage with him.

The great credit of Fasil with the king had now given Ras Michael
violent jealousy. These causes of hatred accumulated every day, so that
Michael had already formed a resolution to destroy Fasil, even though
the king should perish with him. In these sentiments, too, was Gusho of
Amhara, a man of great personal merit, of whose father, Ras Woodage, we
have already spoken, who had filled successively all the great offices
in the last reign. He was immensely rich; had married a daughter of Ras
Michael, and afterwards six or seven other women, being much addicted
to the fair sex, and was lately married to Ozoro Welleta Israel, the
Iteghé’s daughter. Nor was he in any shape an enemy to wine; but very
engaging, and plausible in discourse and behaviour; in many respects
a good officer, careful of his men, but said to be little solicitous
about his word or promise to men of any other profession but that of a
soldier.

An accident of the most trifling kind brought about an open breach
between the king and the Ras, which never after was healed. The weather
was very hot while the army was marching. One day, a little before
their arrival at Gondar, in passing over the vast plain between the
mountains and the lake Tzana, (afterwards the scene of much bloodshed)
Ras Michael, being a little indisposed with the heat, and the sun at
the same time affecting his eyes, which were weak, without other design
than that of shading them, had thrown a white cloth or handkerchief
over his head. This was told the king, then with Fasil in the center,
who immediately sent to the Ras to inquire what was the meaning of that
novelty, and upon what account he presumed to cover his head in his
presence? The white handkerchief was immediately taken off, but the
affront was thought so heinous as never after to admit of atonement.

It must be here observed, that, when the army is in the field, it is a
distinction the king uses, to bind a broad fillet of fine muslin round
his head, which is tied in a double knot, and hangs in two long ends
behind. This, too, is worn by the governor of a province when he is
first introduced into it; and, in absence of the king, is the mark of
supreme power, either direct or delegated, in the person that wears it.

Unless on such occasions, no one covers his head in presence of the
king, nor in sight of the house or palace where the king resides: But
it was not thought, that, being at such a distance in the rear, he was
in the king’s presence, nor that what was caused by infirmity was to
be construed into presumption, or weighed by the nice scale of jealous
prerogative.

The armies returned to the valleys below Gondar, and encamped
separately there, Fasil upon the river Kahha, and Ras Michael on the
Angrab. Gusho was on the right of Michael and left of Fasil, a little
higher up the Kahha, near Koscam, the Iteghè’s palace; but he was on
the opposite side of the river from Fasil, where he had a house of
his own, and several large meadows adjoining. Gusho’s servants and
soldiers now began cutting their master’s grass, and were soon joined
by a number of Fasil’s people, who fell, without ceremony, to the same
employment. An interruption was immediately attempted, a fray ensued,
and several were killed or wounded on both sides, but at last Fasil’s
people were beat back to their quarters.

Gusho complained to Ras Michael of this violation of his property; and
he being now in Gondar, and holding the office of Ras, was, without
doubt, the superior and regular judge of both, as they were both out
of their provinces, and immediately in Michael’s. Upon citation, Fasil
declared that he would submit to no such jurisdiction; and, the
case being referred to the judges next day, it was found unanimously
in council, that Ras Michael was in the right, and that Fasil was
guilty of rebellion. A proclamation in consequence was made at the
palace-gate, superseding Fasil in his government of Damot, and in every
other office which he held under the king, and appointing Boro de Gago
in his place, a man of great interest in Damot and Gojam, and with the
Galla on both sides of the Nile, and married to a sister of Kasmati
Eshté’s, by another mother, otherwise a man of small capacity.

Fasil, after a long and private audience of the king in the night,
decamped early in the morning with his army, and sat down at Azazo, the
high road between Damot and Gondar, and there he intercepted all the
provisions coming from the southward to the capital.

It happened that the house in Gondar, where Ras Michael lived, was but
a small distance from the palace, a window of which opened so directly
into it, that Michael, when sitting in judgment, could be distinctly
seen from thence. One day, when most of his servants had left him, a
shot was fired into the room from this window of the palace, which,
though it missed Michael, wounded a dwarf, who was standing before
him fanning the flies from off his face, so grievously, that the page
fell and expired at the foot of his master. This was considered as the
beginning of the hostilities. Nobody knew from whose hand the shot
came; but the window from which it was aimed sufficiently shewed, that
if it was not by direction, it must at least have been fired with the
knowledge of the king.

Joas lost no time, but removed and encamped at Tedda, and sent Woosheka
to Michael with orders to return to Tigré, and not to see his face;
and, at the same time, declared Lubo governor of Begemder and Amhara.
The Ras scarcely could be brought to see Woosheka; but did not deign
to give any further answer than this, “That the king should know, that
the proper persons to correspond with him as Ras, upon the affairs of
the kingdom, were the judges of the town, or of the palace; not a slave
like Woosheka, whose life, as well as that of all the Gallas in the
king’s presence, was forfeited by the laws of the land. He cautioned
him from appearing again in his presence, for if he did, that he should
surely die.”

The next day a message came from the king, by four judges, forbidding
the Ras again to drink of either the Angrab or the Kahha, but to strike
his tents and return to Tigré upon pain of incurring his highest
displeasure.--To this Michael answered, “That, true it was, his
province was Tigré, but that he was now governor of the whole realm;
that he was an extraordinary officer, called to prevent the ruin of
the country, because, confessedly, the king could not do it; that the
reason of his coming existed to that day; and he was very willing to
submit it to the judges for their solemn opinion, whether the kingdom,
at present in the hands of the Galla, was not in more danger from the
power of those Galla than it was from the constitutional influence of
Mariam Barea. He added, that he expected the king should be ready to
march against Fasil, for which purpose he was to decamp on the morrow.”
The king returned an absolute refusal to march: The Ras thereupon made
proclamation for all the Galla, of every denomination to leave the
capital, the next day, upon pain of death, declaring them outlawed, and
liable to be slain by the first that met them, if, after twenty-four
hours, they were found in Gondar or its neighbourhood, or, after ten
days, in any part of the kingdom. After this, accompanied by Gusho, he
decamped to dislodge Fasil from the strong post which he held at Azazo.

By the king’s refusal to march with Ras Michael in person, it was
supposed that his household troops would not join, but remain with him
to garrison his palace. Joas, however, was too far decided in favour
of Fasil to remain neuter. Michael had encamped the 21st of April in
the evening, on the side of the hill above Azazo, in very rough and
rocky ground, as unfavourable for Fasil’s horse as the slope it had was
favourable for Michael’s musquetry.

The battle was fought on the 22d in the morning, and there was much
blood shed for the time that it lasted. A nephew of Michael, and
his old Fit-Auraris, Netcho, were both slain, and Fasil was totally
defeated. The Galla, who had come from the other side of the Nile, were
very much terrified at Michael’s fire-arms, which contained what they
called the zibib, or grape, meaning thereby the ball. Fasil retired
quickly to Damot, to increase and collect another army again, and to
try his fortune after the rains.

It happened, unfortunately, that among the prisoners taken at Azazo
were some of the king’s black horse. These being his slaves, and
subject only to his commands, sufficiently shewed by whose authority
they came there. They were, therefore, all called before Michael;
two of them were first interrogated, whether the king had sent them
or not? and, upon their denying or refusing to give an answer, their
throats were cut before their companions. The next questioned was
a page of the king, who seeing, from the fate of his friends, what
was to follow his denial, frankly told the Ras, that it was by the
king’s special orders they, and a considerable body of the household
troops, had joined Fasil the night before; and further, that it was the
Armenian, who, by the king’s order, had fired at him, and killed the
dwarf who was fanning the flies from him.

Upon this information all the prisoners were dismissed. The army
returned the same night to Gondar, and, though they had been fasting
all day, a council was held, which sat till very late, at the rising of
which a messenger was dispatched to Wechné for Hatzé Hannes, who was
brought to the foot of the mountain the next day. In the same night
Shalaka Becro, Nebrit Tecla and his two sons, Lika Netcho and his two
sons, and a monk of Tigré, called Welleta Christos, were sent to the
palace to murder the king, which they easily accomplished, having found
him alone. They buried him in the church of St Raphael, as we shall
find from the regicide’s own confession, when he was apprehended, when
we shall relate the particulars.

At the same time Michael exhibited a strange contrast in his behaviour
to the Armenian, who had fled to the house of the Abuna for refuge.
He sent and took him thence, and banished him from Abyssinia, but so
considerately, that he dispatched a servant with him to Masuah to
furnish him with necessaries, to see him embark, and save him from the
cruelty and extortions of the Naybe.

[Illustration]




HANNES II.

1769.

    _Hannes, Brother to Bacuffa, chosen King--Is brought from
    Wechné--Crowned at Gondar--Refuses to march against Fasil--Is
    poisoned by Order of Ras Michael._


HANNES, a man past seventy years of age, made his entry into Gondar
the 3d of May 1769. He was brother to Bacuffa, and having in his time
escaped from the mountain, and being afterwards taken, his hand was cut
off by order of the king his brother, and he was sent back to the place
of his confinement.

It is a law of Abyssinia, as we have already observed, derived from
that of Moses, that no man can be capable either of the throne or
priesthood, unless he be perfect in all his limbs; the want of a hand,
therefore, certainly disqualified Hannes, and it was with that intent
it had been cut off. When this was objected to him in council, Michael
laughed violently, and turned it into ridicule; “What is it that a king
has to do with his hands? Are you afraid he shall not be able to saddle
his own mule, or load his own baggage? Never fear that; when he is
under any such difficulty, he has only to call upon me[100], and I will
help him.”

Hannes, besides his age, was very feeble in body; and having had no
conversation but with monks and priests, this had debilitated his mind
as much as age had done his body. He could not be persuaded to take any
share in government. The whole day was spent in psalms and prayers;
but Ras Michael had brought from the mountain with him two sons,
Tecla Haimanout the eldest, a prince of fifteen years of age, and the
younger, called George, about thirteen.

Guebra Denghel, a nobleman of the first family in Tigré had married
a daughter of Michael by one of his wives in that province. By her
he had one daughter, Welleta Selassé, whom Michael in the beginning,
while Joas and he were yet friends, had destined to be queen, and to
be married to him. Hannes was of the age only to need a Shunnamite;
and Welleta Selassé, young and beautiful, and who merited to be
something more, was destined as this sacrifice to the ambition of her
grandfather. A kind of marriage, I believe, was therefore made, but
never consummated. She lived with Hannes some months in the palace,
but never took any state upon her. She was a wife and a queen merely
in name and idea. Love had in that frozen composition as little share
as ambition, and those two great temptations, a crown and a beautiful
mistress, could not animate Hatzé Hannes to take the field to defend
them. Every possible method was taken by Michael to overcome his
reluctance, and do away his fears. All was vain; he wept, hid himself,
turned monk, demanded to be sent again to Wechné, but absolutely
refused marching with the army.

Michael, who had already seen the danger of leaving a king behind him
while he was in the field, and finding Hannes inexorable, had recourse
to poison, which was given him in his breakfast; and the Ras, by this
means, in less than six months became the deliberate murderer of two
kings.

[Illustration]




TECLA HAIMANOUT II.

1769.

    _Succeeds his Father Hannes--His Character and prudent
    Behaviour--Cultivates Michael’s Friendship--Marches willingly
    against Fasil--Defeats him at Fagitta--Description of that
    Battle._


TECLA HAIMANOUT succeeded his father. He was a prince of a most
graceful figure, tall for his age, rather thin, and of the whitest
shade of Abyssinian colour, such are all those princes that are born
in the mountain. He was not so dark in complexion as a Neapolitan or
Portugueze, had a remarkably fine forehead, large black eyes, but
which had something very stern in them, a straight nose, rather of
the largest, thin lips, and small mouth, very white teeth and long
hair. His features, even in Europe, would have been thought fine. He
was particularly careful of his hair, which he dressed in a hundred
different ways. Though he had been absent but a very few months from
his native mountain, his manners and carriage were those of a prince,
that from his infancy had sat upon an hereditary throne. He had an
excellent understanding, and prudence beyond his years. He was said
to be naturally of a very warm temper, but this he had so perfectly
subdued as scarcely ever to have given an instance of it in public. He
entered into Ras Michael’s views entirely, and was as forward to march
out against Fasil, as his father had been averse to it.

From the time of Hannes’s accession to the throne, Tecla Haimanout
called Michael by the name of Father, and during the few slight
sicknesses the Ras had, he laid by all his state, and attended him
with an anxiety well becoming a son. At this time I entered Abyssinia,
and arrived in Masuah, where there was a rumour only of Hatzé Hannes’s
illness.

The army marched out of Gondar on the 10th of November 1769, taking
the route of Azazo and Dingleber. Fasil was at Buré, and had assembled
a large army from Damot, Agow, and Maitsha. But Welleta Yasous, his
principal officer, had brought together a still larger one, from the
wild nations of Galla beyond the Nile, and this not without some
difficulty. The zibib, or bullet, which had destroyed so many of them
at Azazo, had made an impression on their minds, and been reported to
their countrymen as a circumstance very unpleasing. These wild Pagans,
therefore, had, for the first time, found a reluctance to invade their
ancient enemies the Abyssinians.

Fasil, to overcome this fear of the zibib, had loaded some guns with
powder, and fired them very near at some of his friends, which of
course had hurt nobody. Again he had put ball in his gun, and fired at
cattle afar off; and these being for the most part slightly wounded,
he inferred from thence that the zibib was fatal only at a distance,
but that if they galloped resolutely to the mouth of the gun, the grape
could do no more than the first gun he fired with powder had done to
those he had aimed at.

As soon as Fasil heard that Michael was on his march, he left Buré and
advanced to meet him, his wish being to fight him if possible, before
he should enter into those rich provinces of the Agows, from whence
he drew the maintenance of his army, and expected tribute. Michael’s
conduct warranted this precaution. For no sooner had he entered Fasil’s
government, than he laid waste all Maitsha, destroying every thing with
fire and sword. The old general indeed being perfectly acquainted with
the country, and with the enemy he was to engage, had already fixed
upon his field of battle, and measured the stations that would conduct
him thither.

Instead of taking up the time with spreading the desolation he had
begun, after the first two days, by forced marches he came to Fagitta,
considerably earlier than Fasil expected. This field that Michael had
chosen, was rocky, uneven, and full of ravines in one part, and of
plain smooth turf on the other, which divisions were separated by a
brook full of large stones.

The Nile was on Ras Michael’s left, and in this rugged ground he
stationed his lances and musquetry; for he never made great account
of his horse. Two large churches, St Michael and St George, planted
thick with cedars, and about half a mile distant from each other, were
on his right and left flanks, or rather advanced farther before his
front. A deep valley communicated with the most level of these plains,
descending gently all the way from the celebrated sources of the Nile,
which were not more than half a day’s journey distant. Michael drew up
his army behind the two churches, which were advanced on his right and
left flanks, and among the cedars of these he planted 500 musqueteers
before each church, whom the trees perfectly concealed; he formed his
horse in front, knowing them to be an object the Galla did not fear,
and likely to lead them on to charge rashly. These he gave the command
of to a very active and capable officer, Powussen of Begemder, one of
those eleven servants of Mariam Barea, whose lives Michael saved, by
protecting them in his tent after the battle of Nefas Musa. He had
directed this officer, with a few horse, to scour the small plain, as
soon as he saw the Galla advancing into it from the valley.

As soon as the sun became hot, Fasil’s wild Galla poured into the
plain, and they had now occupied the greatest part of it, which was not
large enough to contain his whole army, when their skirmishing began
by their driving Powussen before them, who fled apparently in great
confusion, crossed the brook, and joined the horse, and formed nearly
between the churches. The Galla, desirous to pursue, were impeded by
the great stones, so that they were in a crowd at the passage of the
brook.

Ayto Welleta Gabriel, factor to Ozoro Esther, was intoxicated with
liquor, but he was a brave man, very active and strong, and of a good
understanding, though, according to a custom among them, he, at times,
to divert the Ras, played the part of a buffoon. In this character,
with his musquet only in his hand, he, though on foot, skirmished in
the middle of a party of Powussen’s horse. When they turned to fly,
Welleta Gabriel found it convenient to do so likewise, and he crossed
the brook without looking behind him. Upon turning round, he saw the
Galla halt, as if in council, in the bed of the rivulet, and taking up
his gun as a bravado, he levelled at the crowd, and had the fortune to
hit the principal man among them, who fell dead among the feet of the
horses.

A small pause ensued; the cry of the Zibib! the Zibib! immediately
began, and a downright confusion and flight followed. The Galla,
already upon the plain, turned upon those coming out of the valley,
and these again upon their companions behind them. The cry of Zibib
Ali[101]! Zibib Ali! was repeated through the whole, spreading terror
and dismay wherever it was heard. Nobody knew what was the misfortune
that had befallen them. Welleta Yasous, who commanded the van, was
carried away by the multitude flying: Fasil, who was at the head of the
Damot and Agows, had not entered the valley, nor could any one tell him
what was the accident in the plain.

Even Michael himself, (as I have heard him say) when, sitting upon
his mule on a small eminence, he saw this extraordinary confusion
and retreat, was not able to assign any cause for it. Though no man
on these occasions had more presence of mind, he remained for a time
motionless, without giving any orders. The troops, however, that lay
hid in the groves of cedars before the churches, who had been silent
and attentive, and Powussen, who commanded the horse which had been
skirmishing, saw distinctly the operation of Welleta Gabriel, and the
confusion that had followed it; without loss of time they attacked the
Galla in the valley, and were soon joined by Gusho and the rest of the
army.

Fasil, in despair at a defeat of which he knew not the cause, came down
among the Galla, fighting very bravely, often facing about upon those
that pressed them, and endeavouring at least to retreat in some sort
of order; but the musqueteers from the church, commanded by Hezekias,
instead of entering the valley, had advanced and ascended the hills, so
that from the sides of them, in the utmost security, they poured down
shot upon the fliers beneath them.

Fasil here lost a great part of his army; but seeing a place in one of
the hills accessible, he left the valley, and ascended the side of the
mountain, leading a large body of his own troops; and, having gained
the smooth ground behind the musqueteers, he came up with them, whilst
intent only upon annoying the Galla, and cut 300 to pieces. Content
with this advantage, and finding his army entirely dispersed, he passed
the sources of the Nile at Geesh, descended into the plain of Assoa,
and encamped near Gooderoo, a small lake there, intending to pass the
night, and collect his scattered forces.

Michael’s army had given over pursuit, but Powussen, with some chosen
horse of Lasta and Begemder, followed Fasil upon his track, and came up
with him a little before the dusk of the evening, on the side of the
lake. Here a great slaughter of wounded and weary men ensued: Fasil
fled, and no resistance was attempted, and the soldiers, satiated with
blood, at last returned, and pursued the enemy no further.

It was the next day in the evening before Powussen joined the camp,
having put to the sword, without mercy, all the stragglers that fell in
the way upon his return. The appearance of this man and his behaviour
made Michael’s joy complete, who already had begun to entertain fears
that some untoward accident had befallen him.

This was the battle of Fagitta, fought on the 9th of December 1769, on
the very ground in which Fasil, just five years before, had murdered
Kasmati Eshté. Those philosophers, who disclaim the direction of a
divine Providence, will calculate how many chances there were, that,
in a kingdom as big as Great Britain, the commission of a crime and its
punishment should both happen in one place, on one day, in the short
space of five years, and in the life of one man.

The extraordinary severity exercised upon the army of the Galla,
after the battle, was still as apparent as it had been in the flight.
Woosheka, of whom we have had already occasion to speak, fell in
among the horse of Powussen and Gusho, and being known, his life was
spared. He was cousin-german to Lubo, but a better man and soldier
than his relation, and, in all the intrigues of the Galla at Gondar,
was considered as an undesigning man, of harmless and inoffensive
manners. He had been companion of Gusho, and many of the principal
commanders in the army, and, after the defeat at Nefas Musa, had the
guard of Powussen and the eleven officers, whom he suffered to escape
into Michael’s tent, as I have already said, while Lubo was murdering
Mariam Barea. He had been, for a time, well known and well esteemed
by Ras Michael, nor was he ever supposed personally to have offended
him, or given umbrage to any one. As he was a man of some fortune and
substance, it was thought the forfeiture of all that he had might more
than atone for any fault that he had ever committed.

It was therefore agreed on the morning after Powussen’s return from the
pursuit, that Gusho and he, when they surrendered this prisoner, should
ask his life and pardon from the Ras, and this they did, prostrating
themselves in the humblest manner with their foreheads on the earth.
Ras Michael, at once forgetting his own interest, and the quality
and consequence of the officers before him, fell into a violent and
outrageous passion against the supplicants, and, after a very short
reproof, ordered each of them to their tents in a kind of disgrace.

He then sternly interrogated Woosheka, whether he did not remember
that, at Tedda, he had ordered him out of the country in ten days?
then, in his own language of Tigré, he asked, if there was any one
among the soldiers that could make a leather bottle? and being answered
in the affirmative, he ordered one to be made of Woosheka’s skin, but
first to carry him to the king. The soldiers understood the command,
though the miserable victim did not, and he was brought to the king,
who would not suffer him to speak, but waved with his hand to remove
him; and they accordingly carried him to the river side, where they
flayed him alive, and brought his skin stuffed with straw to Ras
Michael.

It was not doubted that Ozoro Esther, then in the camp, had sealed the
fate of this wretched victim. She appeared that night in the king’s
tent dressed in the habit of a bride, which she had never before done
since the death of Mariam Barea. Two days after, having obtained her
end, she returned triumphant to Gondar, where Providence visited her
with distress in her own family, for the hardness of her heart to the
sufferings of others.

During this time I was at Masuah, where, by reason of the great
distance and interruption in the roads, these transactions were not
yet known. Hatzé Hannes was still supposed alive, and my errand from
Metical Aga that of being his Physician. I shall now begin an account
of what passed at Masuah, and thence continue my journey to Gondar till
my meeting with the king there.


_END OF THE SECOND VOLUME._




FOOTNOTES:


[Footnote 1: The city of Wolves, or Hyænas.]

[Footnote 2: She had several names, as I have before said, _Judith_ in
Tigré, and in Amhara _Esther_.]

[Footnote 3: Conquetes de Portugais par Lafitan, vol. I. liv. ii. p.
90. Id. ibid. p. 144.]

[Footnote 4: It has been imagined that this number should be increased
to seventy, but I have, followed the text; there would be little
difference in the rashness of the action.]

[Footnote 5: A tribe of the Shepherds; all the rest, but the two first,
unknown in Abyssinia at this day.]

[Footnote 6: Mountain of the Testimony.]

[Footnote 7: The Moors in general are much squarer, stouter-made men,
than the Abyssinians.]

[Footnote 8: Probably Magwas, or Berhan Magwass, the Glory of Grace;
a name often used by queens; for Mogessa has no signification, that I
know, in any of the languages of Ethiopia.]

[Footnote 9: That is, while the family of Zaguè reigned, in Tigré, and
that of Solomon in Shoa, before the restoration.]

[Footnote 10: Vid. Ludolf, lib. 3. No. 29. I have this letter at length
prefixed to the large volume of Canons and Councils, a copy of which
was sent by Zara Jacob to the monks in Jerusalem.]

[Footnote 11: St. Stefano in Rotondis.]

[Footnote 12: Francisco de Branca Leon.]

[Footnote 13: One of the steep mountains used for prisons.]

[Footnote 14: Another church on a hill, one of the quarters of Gondar.
It signifies the Hill of Glory, or Brightness.]

[Footnote 15: Bilur, in the language of Samhar, signifies _fossile
salt_; if it is coloured with any mineral, so as to be either red or
green, it is, in this latter case, applied often to emeralds, and
green-rock crystal.]

[Footnote 16: A race of very barbarous people, all shepherds, having
great substance, and much resembling the nations of Galla. They are
Pagans.]

[Footnote 17: The pomegranate of gold.]

[Footnote 18: The station of David.]

[Footnote 19: Betwudet is an officer that has nearly the same power as
Ras; there were two of these, and both being slain at one battle, as we
shall see in the sequel, the office grew into disuse as unfortunate.]

[Footnote 20: The literal translation of this is, _doubly sharp_, or
_sharp to a fault_; a character he had gained in Portugal.]

[Footnote 21: See Marco Paulo’s Travels into Tartary.]

[Footnote 22: On the west side of the peninsula on the Atlantic.]

[Footnote 23: Vide Marmol, vol. i. cap. 37.]

[Footnote 24: Is a subject paying Capitation.]

[Footnote 25: Vid. David’s letter to Emanuel, king of Portugal 1524.]

[Footnote 26: Vide Map of Shoa.]

[Footnote 27: Or Governor.]

[Footnote 28: Vide Poncet’s travels, in his return through Tigré, p.
116. London edit. 12mo. 1709.]

[Footnote 29: In Barbary called _Mishta_, in Abyssinia, _Kagga_.]

[Footnote 30: This is a name of humility. He is a great officer, and
has no care or charge of asses.]

[Footnote 31: Alvarez Histoire d’Ethiopic, p. 157.]

[Footnote 32: Canso el Gauri, and Tomum Bey.]

[Footnote 33: Selim I. emperor of the Ottomans.]

[Footnote 34: It was he who, as we have seen, slew the Moor Maffudi in
single combat in the beginning of this reign.]

[Footnote 35: Constant in the faith.]

[Footnote 36: Tellez, lib. 2. cap. 27.]

[Footnote 37: Dated at Rome 16th Feb. 1555. See Tellez, lib. 2. cap.
22.]

[Footnote 38: See Bermudes’s account of these times, printed at Lisbon
by Francis Correa, A. D. 1565.]

[Footnote 39: The Mountain of Gold.]

[Footnote 40: Purch. vol. 2.]

[Footnote 41: Ludolf, lib. 2. cap. 6.]

[Footnote 42: To Geshen or Wechné.]

[Footnote 43: See Le Grande’s History of Abyssinia.]

[Footnote 44: See the article Wanzey in the Appendix.]

[Footnote 45: Jerome Lobo Hist. of Abyssinia ap. Le Grande.]

[Footnote 46: The name of infant-king seems to have been given as a
nick-name in Abyssinia, and is preserved to this day.]

[Footnote 47: We have mentioned this treaty in the reign of Icon Amlac.]

[Footnote 48: Then the metropolis upon the Lake Tzana.]

[Footnote 49: Register of the cattle; so the governor of Dembea is
called.]

[Footnote 50: See the History of the rise of this monarchy in my return
through Sennaar.]

[Footnote 51: A low territory at the foot of Lamalmon.]

[Footnote 52: It was probably part of the fruits of the new religion,
and the work of his new religious advisers.]

[Footnote 53: The words, Boren, and Bertuma Galla, have no meaning in
the Ethiopic.]

[Footnote 54: See the Map.]

[Footnote 55: See the provincial letters of the Jesuits in Tellez, lib.
iv. cap. 5.]

[Footnote 56: Which signifies the Passage.]

[Footnote 57: This will be more enlarged upon hereafter.]

[Footnote 58: Tellez, lib. iv. cap. 38.]

[Footnote 59: It is apparently a speech in a passion, for this Sela
Christos was one of the most learned of the Abyssinians; yet the words
themselves, if literally translated, are scarcely intelligible.]

[Footnote 60: I have seen them often at Madrid.]

[Footnote 61: Called by the Agows, Krihaha.]

[Footnote 62: A name of the black Pagans bordering on Sennaar to the
south-west.]

[Footnote 63: Astronom. de M. de La Lande, liv. 19. p. 366.]

[Footnote 64: See the article _kantuffa_ in the Appendix.]

[Footnote 65: The white mountain.]

[Footnote 66: The mountain of salt.]

[Footnote 67: By Chancellor of the Nation is meant the officer
immediately next the consul, who keeps the records, and has a
department absolutely independent of the Consul.]

[Footnote 68: Vid. Poncet.]

[Footnote 69: It is plain Poncet had no instruments for observation
with him, nor was he probably acquainted with the use of them.]

[Footnote 70: To be described hereafter.]

[Footnote 71: See an elevation of this in my account of Axum.]

[Footnote 72: And there he wrote his Teliamede which supposes men
were first created fishes, for which he was excommunicated. It was an
opinion perfectly worthy of alarming the Sorbonne.]

[Footnote 73: Plin. vol. 1. lib. 6. cap. 30. p. 376.]

[Footnote 74: Father Bernat, a Frenchman.]

[Footnote 75: We have seen these were recommended by M. Maillet, the
consul.]

[Footnote 76: This is not the king’s seal. It is the invention of some
Mahometan employed to write the letters.]

[Footnote 77: See the letter itself, it is the last in Le Grande’s
book, and in Latin, if I remember rightly.]

[Footnote 78: Vid. the letter as quoted above.]

[Footnote 79: Abdelcader, son of Ounsa, retired here.]

[Footnote 80: It signifies Justus.]

[Footnote 81: Vid general map.]

[Footnote 82: Juvenal, sat. 13. l. 163.]

[Footnote 83: Nisi malitia suppleat ætatem.]

[Footnote 84: Herod. lib. 3, par. 17, & seq.]

[Footnote 85: Supposed to be the Garamantica Vallis of Ptolemy.]

[Footnote 86: Dodswell’s dissertation of Hanno’s Periplus--Montesquieu,
tom. I. lib. 21. cap. 11.]

[Footnote 87: This sensation of the savage in the heart of Africa seems
to be unknown to the enemies of the slave-trade; they talk much of
heat, without knowing the material suffering of the negro is from cold.]

[Footnote 88: There seems here some contradiction which needs
explanation. It is said that the palace was burnt before Oustas went to
his tent. How then could the soldiers assemble in it afterwards? The
palace consists of a number of separate houses at no great distance,
but detached from one another with one room in each. That where the
coronation is performed is called Anbasa Bet; another, where the king
sits in festivals, is called Zeffan Bet; another is called Werk Sacala,
the gold-house; another Gimja Bet, or the brocade-house, where the
wardrobe and the gold stuffs used for presents, or received as such,
are laid. Now, we suppose Oustas in any one of these apartments, say
Zeffan Bet, which he left to go to his tent, and it was then burnt;
still there remained the coronation-house where the regalia was kept,
which the soldiers locked up that it might not be used to crown Fasil,
Oustas’s son, whom they thought the seven great men they had murdered
conspired to place upon the throne after his father.]

[Footnote 89: Mistress to Yasous, and mother to David.]

[Footnote 90: But there can be no doubt both opinions are absolute
heresy, in the most liberal sense of that word, as expressly denying
our Saviour’s consubstantiality.]

[Footnote 91: This drum is of beaten silver; the Abyssinians say, that
this metal alone is capable of conveying the sweet sound contained in
a proclamation of peace. It was carried off by the rebels after the
retreat of Serbraxos.]

[Footnote 92: Dek.]

[Footnote 93: A relict of the most precious kind, believed to have come
from Jerusalem, and been painted by St Luke.]

[Footnote 94: About one hundred and eighty-six pounds, an ounce of gold
at a medium being 10 crowns.]

[Footnote 95: This is a fish common in the Mediterranean, of the kind
of anchovies, the common food of the galley-slaves, and lower sort of
people.]

[Footnote 96: Noba, in the language of Sennaar, signifies Soldier; it
is probably from this the ancient name of Nubia first came.]

[Footnote 97: A well near Karoota, immediately on the frontiers of
Begemder.]

[Footnote 98: This is commonly done in times of trouble, to keep the
townsmen in awe, as if fire was intended, which would not be in their
power to quench.]

[Footnote 99: Nearly the same distinction as the silly one made in
Britain between the French king and king of France.]

[Footnote 100: What made the ridicule here was, Michael was older than
the king, and could not stand alone.]

[Footnote 101: They have the grape along with them.]


[Transcriber's Note:

Inconsistent double quotes and capitalization are as in the original.

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Travels to Discover the Source of the
Nile, Volume II, by James Bruce

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS VOL. 2 OF 2 ***

***** This file should be named 54181-0.txt or 54181-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/1/8/54181/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Wayne Hammond and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sinners and Saints, by Phil Robinson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Sinners and Saints
       A Tour Across the States and Round Them, with Three Months
       Among the Mormons

Author: Phil Robinson

Release Date: January 31, 2017 [EBook #54079]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SINNERS AND SAINTS ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Steven
Fluckiger, Mariah Averett, and Lauren McGuinness.








SINNERS AND SAINTS

A TOUR ACROSS THE STATES, AND ROUND THEM

WITH

THREE MONTHS AMONG THE MORMONS


BY PHIL ROBINSON

AUTHOR OF "IN MY INDIAN GARDEN," "UNDER THE PUNKAH," "NOAH'S ARK,'"
ETC., ETC.


NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION


LONDON

1892



Inscribed,

WITH AUTHOR'S GRATITUDE, TO A FRIEND, JOHN STUART DOWNING.



CONTENTS.

--

CHAPTER I.

FROM NEW YORK TO CHICAGO.

By the Pennsylvania Limited--Her Majesty's swine--Glimpses of
Africa and India--"Eligible sites for Kingdoms"--The Phoenix
city--Street scenes--From pig to pork--The Sparrow line--Chicago
Mountain--Melancholy merry-makers.


CHAPTER II.

FROM CHICAGO TO DENVER.

Fathers of Waters--"Rich Lands lie Flat"--The Misery River--Council
Bluffs--A "Live" town, sir--Two murders: a contrast--Omaha--The
immorality of "writing up"--On the prairies--The modesty of
"Wish-ton-Wish"--The antelope's tower of refuge--Out of Nebraska into
Colorado--Man-eating Tiger.


CHAPTER III.

IN LEADVILLE.

The South Park line--Oscar Wilde on sunflowers as food--In a
wash-hand basin--Anti-Vigilance Committees--Leadville the city of
the carbonates--"Busted" millionaires--The philosophy of thick
boots--Colorado miners--National competition in lions--Abuse of the
terms "gentleman" and "lady"--Up at the mines--Under the pine-trees.


CHAPTER IV.

FROM LEADVILLE TO SALT LAKE CITY.

What is the conductor of a Pullman car?--Cannibalism fatal to lasting
friendships--Starving Peter to feed Paul--Connexion between Irish
cookery and Parnellism--Americans not smokers--In Denver--"The Queen
City of the Plains"--Over the Rockies--Pride in a cow, and what came
of it--Sage-brush--Would ostriches pay in the West?--Echo Canyon--The
Mormons' fortifications--Great Salt Lake in sight.


CHAPTER V.

THE CITY OF THE HONEY-BEE.

Zion--Deseret--A City Of Two Peoples--"Work" the watch-word of
Mormonism--A few facts to the credit of the Saints--The text of the
Edmunds Bill--In the Mormon Tabernacle--The closing scene of the
Conference.


CHAPTER VI.

LEGISLATION AGAINST PLURALITY.

A people under a ban--What the Mormon men think of the Anti-Polygamy
Bill--And what the Mormon women say of polygamy--Puzzling
confidences--Practical plurality a very dull affair--But theoretically
a hedge-hog problem--Matrimonial eccentricities--The fashionable
milliner fatal to plurality--Absurdity of comparing Moslem polygamy
with Mormon plurality--Are the women of Utah happy?--Their enthusiasm
for Women's Rights.


CHAPTER VII.

SUA SI BONA NORINT.

A Special Correspondent's lot--Hypothecated wits--The Daughters of
Zion--Their modest demeanour--Under the banner of Woman's Rights--The
discoverer discovered--Turning the tables--"By Jove, sir, you shall
have mustard with your beefsteak!"


CHAPTER VIII.

COULD THE MORMONS FIGHT?

An unfulfilled prophecy--Had Brigham Young been still
alive?--The hierarchy of Mormonism--The fighting Apostle and his
colleagues--Plurality a revelation--Rajpoot infanticide: how it was
stamped out--Would the Mormons submit to the process?--Their fighting
capabilities--Boer and Mormon: an analogy between the Drakensberg and
the Wasatch ranges--The Puritan fanaticism of the Saints--Awaiting the
fulness of time and of prophecy.


CHAPTER IX.

THE SAINTS AND THE RED MEN.

Prevalent errors as to the red man--Secret treaties--The policy of the
Mormons towards Indians--A Christian heathen--Fighting-strength of
Indians friendly to Mormons.


CHAPTER X.

REPRESENTATIVE AND UNREPRESENTATIVE MORMONISM.

Mormonism and Mormonism--Salt Lake City not representative--The
miracles of water--How settlements grow--The town of Logan: one of the
Wonders of the West--The beauty of the valley--The rural simplicity of
life--Absence of liquor and crime--A police force of one man--Temple
mysteries--Illustrations of Mormon degradation--Their settlement of the
"local option" question.


CHAPTER XI.

THROUGH THE MORMON SETTLEMENTS.

Salt Lake City to Nephi--General similarity of the settlements--From
Salt Lake Valley into Utah Valley--A lake of legends--Provo--Into
the Juab valley--Indian reminiscences--Commercial integrity of the
saints--At Nephi--Good work done by the saints--Type of face in rural
Utah--Mormon "doctrine" and Mormon "meetings."


CHAPTER XII.

FROM NEPHI TO MANTI.

English companies and their failures--A deplorable neglect of claret
cup--Into the San Pete Valley--Reminiscences of the Indians--The
forbearance of the red man--The great temple at Manti--Masonry and
Mormon mysteries--In a tithing-house.


CHAPTER XIII.

FROM MANTI TO GLENWOOD.

Scandinavian Mormons--Danish ol--Among the orchards at Manti--On the
way to Conference--Adam and Eve--The protoplasm of a settlement--Ham
and eggs--At Mayfield--Our teamster's theory of the ground-hog--On
the way to Glenwood--Volcanic phenomena and lizards--A suggestion for
improving upon Nature--Primitive Art.


CHAPTER XIV.

FROM GLENWOOD TO MONROE.

From Glenwood to Salina--Deceptiveness of appearances--An apostate
Mormon's friendly testimony--Reminiscences of the Prophet Joseph
Smith--Rabbit-hunting in a waggon--Lost in the sage-brush--A day at
Monroe--Girls riding pillion--The Sunday drum--Waiting for the right
man: "And what if he is married?"--The truth about apostasy: not always
voluntary.


CHAPTER XV.

AT MONROE.

"Schooling" in the Mormon districts--Innocence as to whisky, but
connoisseurs in water--"What do you think of that water, sir?"--Gentile
dependents on Mormon charity--The one-eyed rooster--Notice to All!


CHAPTER XVI.

JACOB HAMBLIN.

A Mormon missionary among the Indians--The story Of Jacob Hamblin's
life--His spiritualism, the result of an intense faith--His good work
among the Lamanites--His belief in his own miracles.


CHAPTER XVII.

THROUGH MARYSVALE TO KINGSTON.

Piute County--Days of small things--A swop in the sage-brush; two
Bishops for one Apostle--The Kings of Kingston--A failure in Family.


CHAPTER XVIII.

FROM KINGSTON TO ORDERVILLE.

On the way to Panguitch--Section-houses not Mormon homes--Through wild
country--Panguitch and its fish--Forbidden pleasures--At the Source of
the Rio Virgin--The surpassing beauty of Long Valley--The Orderville
Brethren--A success in Family Communism.


CHAPTER XIX.

MORMON VIRTUES.

Red ants and anti-Mormons--Ignorance of the Mormons among
Gentiles in Salt Lake City--Mormon reverence for the Bible--Their
struggle against drinking-saloons in the city--Conspicuous piety
in the settlements--Their charity--Their sobriety (to my great
inconvenience)--The literature of Mormonism utterly unreliable--Neglect
of the press by the Saints--Explanation of the wide-spread
misrepresentation of Mormonism.


CHAPTER XX.

DOWN THE ONTARIO MINE


CHAPTER XXI.

FROM UTAH INTO NEVADA.

Rich and ugly Nevada--Leaving Utah--The gift of the Alfalfa--Through a
lovely country to Ogden--The great food devouring trick--From Mormon to
Gentile: a sudden contrast--The son of a cinder--Is the red man of no
use at all?--The papoose's papoose--Children all of one family.


CHAPTER XXII.

FROM NEVADA INTO CALIFORNIA.

Of bugbears--Suggestions as to sleeping-cars--A Bannack chief, his
hat and his retinue--The oasis of Humboldt--Past Carson Sink--A
reminiscence of wolves--"Hard places"--First glimpses of California--A
corn miracle--Bunch-grass and Bison--From Sacramento to Benicia.


CHAPTER XXIII.

San Franciscans, their fruits and their falsehoods--Their neglect
of opportunities--A plague of flies--The pigtail problem--Chinamen
less black than they are painted--The seal rocks--The loss of the
Eurydice--A jeweller's fairyland--The mystery of gems.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Gigantic America--Of the treatment of strangers--The wild-life
world--Railway Companies' food-frauds--California Felix--Prairie-dog
history--The exasperation of wealth--Blessed with good oil--The
meek lettuce and judicious onion--Salads and Salads--The perils of
promiscuous grazing.


CHAPTER XXV.

The Carlyle of vegetables--The moral in blight--Bee-farms--The city of
Angels--Of squashes--Curious vegetation--The incompatibility of camels
and Americans--Are rabbits "seals"?--All wilderness and no weather--An
"infinite torment of flies."


CHAPTER XXVI.

THROUGH THE COWBOYS' COUNTRY.

The Santa Cruz valley--The cactus--An ancient and honourable pueblo--A
terrible beverage--Are cicadas deaf?--A floral catastrophe--The
secretary and the peccaries.


CHAPTER XXVII.

American neglect of natural history--Prairie-dogs again; their courtesy
and colouring--Their indifference to science--A hard crowd--Chuckers
out--Makeshift Colorado.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Nature's holiday--Through wonderful country--Brown negroes a libel
on mankind--The Wild-flower State--The black problem--A piebald
flirt--The hippopotamus and the flea--A narrow escape--The home of the
swamp-goblin--Is the moon a fraud?


CHAPTER XXIX.

Frogs, in the swamp and as a side-dish--Negroids of the swamp
age--Something like a mouth--Honour in your own country--The Land of
Promise--Civilization again.



CHAPTER I.

FROM NEW YORK TO CHICAGO.

    By the Pennsylvania Limited--Her Majesty's swine--Glimpses of
    Africa and India--"Eligible sites for Kingdoms"--The Phoenix
    city--Street scenes--From pig to pork--The Sparrow line--Chicago
    Mountain--Melancholy merry-makers.

"DOES the fast train to Chicago ever stop?" was the question of a
bewildered English fellow-passenger, Westward-bound like myself, as I
took my seat in the car of the Pennsylvania Limited mail that was to
carry me nearly half the distance from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
"Oh, yes," I replied, "it stops--at Chicago."

By this he recognized in me a fellow-innocent, and so we foregathered
at once, breakfasted together, and then went out to smoke the calumet
together.

--

To an insular traveller, it is a prodigiously long journey this,
across the continent of America, but I found the journey a perpetual
enjoyment. Even the dull country of the first hour's travelling had
many points of interest for the stranger--scattered hamlets of wooden
houses that were only joined together by straggling strings of cocks
and hens; the others that seemed to have been trying to scramble over
the hill and down the other side but were caught just as they got to
the top and pinned down to the ground with lightning conductors; the
others that had palings round them to keep them from running away, but
had got on to piles as if they were stilts and intended (when no one
was looking) to skip over the palings and go away; the others that had
rows of dwarf fir-trees in front of them, through which they stared out
of both their windows like a forward child affecting to be shy behind
its fingers. These fir-trees are themselves very curious, for they give
the country a half-cultivated appearance, and in some places make the
hillsides and valleys look like immense cemeteries, and only waiting
for the tombstones. Even the levels of flooded land and the scorched
forests were of interest, as significant of a country still busy over
its rudiments.

"All charcoal and puddles," said a fellow-traveller disparagingly; "I'm
very glad we're going so fast through it."

Now for my own part I think it looks very uncivil of a train to go
with a screech through a station without stopping, and I always wish I
could say something in the way of an apology to the station-master for
the train's bad manners. No doubt people who live in very small places
get accustomed to trains rushing past their platforms without stopping
even to say "By your leave." But at first it must be rather painful.
At least I should think it was. On the other hand, the people "in the
mofussil" (which is the Anglo-Indian for "all the country outside one's
own town") did not pay much attention to our train. Everybody went
about their several works for all the world as if we were not flashing
by. Even the dogs trotted about indifferently, without even so much as
noticing us, except occasionally some distant mongrel, who barked at
the train as if it was a stray bullock, and smiled complacently upon
the adjoining landscape when he found how thoroughly he had frightened
it away.

There seemed to me a curious dearth of small wild life. The English
"country" is so full of birds that all others seem, by comparison,
birdles. Once, I saw a russet-winged hawk hovering over a copse of
water-oak as if it saw something worth eating there; once, too, I saw
a blue-bird brighten a clump of cedars. Now and again a vagabond crow
drifted across the sky. But, as compared with Europe or parts of the
East which I know best, bird-life was very scanty.

And presently Philadelphia came sliding along to meet us with a stately
decorum of metalled roads and well-kept public grounds, and we stopped
for the first of the twelve halts, worth calling such, which I had to
make in the 3000 miles between the Atlantic and the Pacific.

How treacherously the trains in America start! There is no warning
given, so far as an ordinary passenger can see, that the start is under
contemplation, and it takes him by surprise. The American understands
that "All aboard" means "If you don't jump up at once you'll be left
behind." But to those accustomed to a "first" and a "second" and a
"third" bell--and accustomed, too, not to get up even then until the
guard has begged them as a personal favour to take their seats--the
sudden departure of the American locomotive presents itself as a rather
shabby sort of practical joke.

The quiet, unobtrusive scenery beyond Philadelphia is English in
character, and would be still more so if there were hedges instead
of railings. By the way, whenever reading biographical notices of
distinguished Americans I have been surprised to find that so many of
them at one time or other had "split rails" for a subsistence. But now
that I have followed the "course of empire" West, I am not the least
surprised. I only wonder that every American has not split rails, at
one time or another, or, indeed, gone on doing it all his life. For
how such a prodigious quantity of rails ever got split (even supposing
distinguished men to have assisted in the industry in early life)
passes my feeble comprehension. All the way from New York to Chicago
there are on an average twenty lines of split rails running parallel
with the railway track, in sight all at once! And after all, this is
only one narrow strip across a gigantic continent. In fact, the two
most prominent "natural features" of the landscape along this route are
dwarf firs and split rails. But no writer on America has ever told me
so. Nor have I ever been told of the curious misapprehension prevalent
in the States as to the liberty of the subject in the British Isles.

In America, judging at any rate from the speech of "the average
American," I find that there is a belief prevalent that the English
nation "lies prostrate under the heel of a tyrant." What a shock to
those who think thus, must have been that recent episode of the queen's
pigs at Slough!

Six swine and a calf belonging to her Majesty found themselves, the
other day, impounded by the Slough magistrates for coming to market
without a licence. Slough, from geographical circumstances over which
it has no control, happens to be in Buckinghamshire, and this country
has been declared "an infected district," so that the bailiff who
brought his sovereign's pigs to market, without due authority to do
so, transgressed the law. Two majesties thus came into collision
over the calf, and that of the law prevailed. Such a constitutional
triumph as this goes far to clear away the clouds that appeared to be
gathered upon the political horizon, and the shadows of a despotic
dictatorship which seemed to be falling across England begin to
vanish. The written law, contained probably in a very dilapidated
old copy in the possession of these rural magistrates, a dogs'-eared
and, it may be, even a ragged volume, asserted itself supreme over a
monarch's farmyard stock, and dared to break down that divinity which
doth hedge a Sovereign's swine. There are some who say that in the
British Isles men are losing their reverence for the law, and that
justice wears two faces, one for the rich and another for the poor.
They would have us believe that only the parasites of princes sit in
high place, and that the scales of justice rise or fall according to
the inclinations of the sceptre, with the obsequious regularity of the
tides that wait upon the humours of the moon. But such an incident
as this, when the Justices of Slough, those intrepid Hampdens, sate
sternly in their places, and, fearless of Royal frowns and all the
displeasure of Windsor, dispensed to the pigs, born in the purple, and
to the calf that had lived so near a throne, the impartial retribution
of a fine--with costs--gives a splendid refutation to these calumnies.
Where shall we look in Republican history for such another incident?
or where search for dauntless magistrates like those of Slough, who
shut their eyes against the reflected glitter of a Court, who fined the
Royal calf for risking the health of Hodge's miserable herd, and gave
the costs against the Imperial pigs for travelling into Buckinghamshire
without a licence? Fiat justitia, ruat coelum. There was no truckling
here to borrowed majesty, no sycophant adulation of Royal ownership;
but that fine old English spirit of courageous independence which has
made tyrants impossible in our island and our law supreme. It was of
no use before such men as these, the stout-hearted champions of equal
justice, for the bailiff to plead manorial privilege, or to threaten
the thunders of the House of Brunswick. They were as implacable as a
bench of Rhadamanthuses, and gave these distinguished hogs the grim
choice between paying a pound or going to one. Nor, to their credit
be it said, did either bailiff, calf, or pigs exhibit resentment. On
the contrary, they accepted judgment with that respectful acquiescence
which characterizes our law-abiding race, and the swine turned without
a murmur from the scene of their repulse, and trotted cheerfully before
the bailiff out of Buckinghamshire back to Windsor.

The bailiff, no doubt, bethought him of the past, and wished the good
old days of feudalism were back, when a King's pig was a better man
than a Buckinghamshire magistrate. But if he did, he abstained from
saying so. On the contrary, he paid his fine like a loyal subject, and
gathering his innocent charges round him went forth, more in sorrow
than in anger, from the presence of the magisterial champions of the
public interests. The punished pigs, too, may have felt, perhaps,
just a twinge of regret for the days when they roamed at will over
the oak-grown shires, infecting each other as they chose, without any
thought of Contagious Diseases Acts or vigilant justices. But they
said nothing; and the spectacle of an upright stipendiary dispensing
impartial justice to a law-abiding aristocracy was thus complete.

To return to my car. Beyond Philadelphia the country was waking up for
Spring. The fields were all flushed with the first bright promise of
harvest; blackbirds--reminding me of the Indian king-crows in their
sliding manner of flight and the conspicuous way in which they use
their tails as rudders--were flying about in sociable parties; and
flocks of finches went jerking up the hill-sides by fits and starts
after the fashion of these frivolous little folk.

A mica-schist (it may be gneiss) abounds along the railway track, and
it occurred to me that I had never, except in India, seen this material
used for the ornamentation of houses. Yet it is very beautiful. In the
East they beat it up into a powder--some is white, some yellow--and
after mixing it with weak lime and water, wash the walls with it, the
result being a very effective although subdued sparkle, in some places
silvery, in others golden.

Nearing Harrisburg the country begins to resemble upper Natal very
strongly, and when we reached the Susquehanna, I could easily have
believed that we were on the Mooi, on the borders of Zululand. But the
superior majesty of the American river soon asserted itself, and I
forgot the comparison altogether as I looked out on this truly noble
stream, with the finely wooded hills leaning back from it on either
side, as if to give its waters more spacious way.

And then Harrisburg, and the same stealthy departure of the train.
But outside the station our having started was evident enough, for
a horse that had been left to look after a buggy for a few minutes,
took fright, and with three frantic kangaroo-leaps tried to take the
conveyance whole over a wall. But failing in this, it careered away
down the road with the balance of the buggy dangling in a draggle-tail
sort of way behind it.

Nature works with so few ingredients that landscape repeats itself in
every continent. For there is a limit, after all, to the combinations
possible of water, mountain, plain, valley, and vegetation. This is
strictly true, of course, only when we deal with things generically.
Specific combinations go beyond arithmetic. But even with her species,
Nature delights in singing over old songs and telling the tales
she has already told. For instance here, after passing Harrisburg,
is a wonderful glimpse of Naini Tal in the Indian hills--memorable
for a terribly fatal landslip three years ago--with its oaks and
rhododendrons and scattered pines. In the valleys the streams go
tumbling along with willows on either bank, and here and there on the
hillsides, shine white houses with orchards about them.

The houses men build for themselves when they are thinking only of
shelter are ugly enough. Elegance, like the nightingale, is a creature
of summer-time, when the hard-working months of the year are over and
Nature sits in her drawing-room, so to speak, playing the fine lady,
painting the roses and sweetening the peaches. But, ugly though they
are, these scattered homesteads are by far the finest lines in all the
great poem of this half-wild continent, and lend a grand significance
to every passage in which they occur. And the pathos of it! Look at
those two horses and a man driving a plough through that scrap of
ground yonder. There is not another living object in view, though the
eye covers enough ground for a European principality. Yet that man
dares to challenge all this tremendous Nature! It is David before
Goliath, before a whole wilderness of Goliaths, with a plough for a
sling and a ploughshare for a pebble.

Here all of a sudden is another man, all alone with some millions of
trees and the Alleghanies. And he stands there with an axe in his
hands, revolving in that untidy head of his what he shall do next to
the old hills and their reverend forest growth. The audacity of it, and
the solemnity!

It would be as well perhaps for sentiment if every man was quite alone.
For I find that if there are two men together one immediately tries
to sell the other something; and to inform him of its nature, he goes
and paints the name of his disgusting commodities on the smooth faces
of rocks and on tree-trunks. Now, any landscape, however grand, loses
in dignity if you see "Bunkum's Patent" inscribed in the foreground in
whitewash letters six feet high.

What a mercy it is these quacks cannot advertise on the sky--or on
running water!

For the river is now at its grandest and it keeps with us all the
afternoon, showing on either side splendid waterways between sloping
spurs of the hills densely wooded and strewn with great boulders.
But on a sudden the mountains are gone and the river with them, and
we speed along through a region of green grass-land and abundant
cultivation. Land agents might truthfully advertise it in lots as
"eligible sites for kingdoms."

And so on, past townships, whose names running (at forty miles an hour)
no man can read, and round the famous "horseshoe curve"--where it looks
as if the train were trying to get its head round in order to swallow
its tail--down into valleys already taking their evening tints of misty
purple, and pink, and pale blue. And then Derry.

Just before we arrived there, two freight trains had selected Derry as
an opportune spot for a collision, and had collided accordingly. There
could have been very little reservation about their collision, for the
wreck was complete, and when we got under way again we could just make
out by the moonlight the scattered limbs of carriages lying heaped
about on the bank. In some places it looked as if a clumsy apprentice
had been trying to make packing-cases out of freight wagons, but had
given up on finding that he had broken the pieces too small. And they
were too big for matches. So it was rather a useless sort of collision,
after all--and no one was hurt.

But "the Pennsylvania Limited" has very little leisure to think about
other people's collisions, and so we were soon on our way again through
the moonlit country, with the hills in the distance lying still and
black, like round-backed monsters sleeping, and the stations going by
in sudden snatches of lamplight, and every now and then a train, its
bell giving a wail exactly like the sound of a shell as it passes over
the trenches. And so to Pittsburg, and, our "five minutes" over, the
train stole away like a hyena, snarling and hiccoughing, and we were
again out in the country, with everything about us beautified by the
gracious alchemy of the moonlight and the stars.

And the Ohio River rolled alongside, with its steamers ploughing
up furrows of ghostly white froth, and unwinding as they went long
streamers of ghostly black--and then I fell asleep.

When I awoke next morning I was in Indiana, and very sunny it looked
without a hill in sight to make a shadow. The water stood in lakes on
the dead level of the country, and horses, cattle, sheep, and here and
there a pig--a pregustation of Chicago--grazed and rooted, very well
satisfied apparently with pastures that had no ups and downs to trouble
them as they loitered about. And as the morning wore on, the people
woke up, and were soon as busy as their windmills. In the fields the
teams were ploughing; in the towns, the children were trooping off to
school. But the eternal level began at last, apparently, to weary the
Pennsylvania Limited, for it commenced slackening speed and finding
frivolous pretexts for coming nearly to a standstill--the climax being
reached when we halted in front of a small, piebald pig. We looked at
the pig and the pig looked at us, and the pig got the best of it, for
we sneaked off, leaving the porker master of the situation and still
looking.

But these great flats--what a paradise of snipe they are, and how
golf-players might revel on them! Birds were abundant. Crows went about
in bands recruiting "black marauders" in every copse; blackbirds flew
over in flocks, and small things of the linnet kind rose in wisps from
the sedges and osiers. And there was another bird of which I did not
then know the name, that was a surprise every time it left the ground,
for it sate all black and flew half scarlet. Could not these marsh
levels be utilized for the Indian water-nut, the singhara? In Asia
where it is cultivated it ranks almost as a local staple of food, and
is delicious.

A noteworthy feature of the country, by the way, is the sudden
appearance of hedge-rows. No detail of landscape that I know of makes
scenery at once so English. And then we find ourselves steaming along
past beds of osiers, with long waterways stretching up northwards, with
here and there painted duck, like the European sheldrake, floating
under the shadows of the fir-trees, and then I became aware of a great
green expanse of water showing through the trees, and I asked "What is
that? The water must be very deep to be such a colour." "That is Lake
Michigan," was the answer, "and this is Chicago we are coming to now."

And very soon we found ourselves in the station of the great city by
the lake, with the masts of shipping alongside the funnels of engines.
But not a pig in sight!

I had thought that Chicago was all pigs.

And what a city it is, this central wonder of the States! As a whole,
Chicago is nearly terrific. The real significance of this phoenix city
is almost appalling. Its astonishing resurrection from its ashes and
its tremendous energy terrify jelly-fishes like myself. Before they
have got roads that are fit to be called roads, these Chicago men have
piled up the new County Hall, to my mind one of the most imposing
structures I have ever seen in all my wide travels.

Chicago does not altogether seem to like it, for every one spoke of
it as "too solid-looking," but for my part I think it almost superb.
The architect's name, I believe, is Egan; but whence he got his
architectural inspiration I cannot say. It reminds me in part of a wing
of the Tuileries, but why it does I could not make up my mind.

Then again, look at this Chicago which allows its business
thoroughfares to be so sumptuously neglected--some of them are almost
as disreputable-looking as Broadway--and goes and lays out imperial
"boulevards" to connect its "system of parks." These boulevards, simply
if left alone for the trees to grow up and the turf to grow thick,
will before long be the finest in all the world. The streets in the
city, however, if left alone much longer, would be a disgrace to--well,
say Port Said. The local administration, they say, is "corrupt." But
that is the standing American explanation for everything with which a
stranger finds fault. I was always told the same in New York--and would
you seriously tell me that the municipal administration of New York
is corrupt?--to account for congestion of traffic, fat policemen, bad
lamps, sidewalks blocked with packing-cases, &c., &c. And in Chicago it
accounts for the streets being more like rolling prairie than streets,
for cigar stores being houses of assignation, for there being so much
orange peel and banana skin on the sidewalks, &c., &c. But I am not at
all sure that "municipal corruption" is not a scapegoat for want of
public spirit.

But let the public spirit be as it may, there can be no doubt as to
the private enterprise in Chicago. Take the iron industry alone--what
prodigious proportions it is assuming, and how vastly it will be
increased when that circum-urban "belt line" of railways is completed!
Take, again, the Pullman factories. They by themselves form an industry
which might satisfy any town of moderate appetite. But Chicago is a
veritable glutton for speculative trade.

The streets at all times abound with incident. Here at one corner was
a Hansom cab, surely the very latest development of European science,
with two small black children, looking like imps in a Drury Lane
pantomime, trying to pin "April Fool" on to the cabman's dependent
tails. Could anything be more incongruous? In the first place, what
have negro children to do with April fooling? and in the next, imagine
these small scraps in ebony taking liberties with a Hansom! A group
of cowboy-and-miner looking men were grouped in ludicrous attitudes
of sentimentality before a concertina-player, who was wheezing out
his own version of "old country" airs. On the arm of one of the group
languished a lady with a very dark skin, dressed in a rich black silk
dress, with a black satin mantle trimmed with sumptuous fur, and
half an ostrich on her head by way of bonnet and feathers. The men
there, as in most of America, strike me as being very judicious in the
arrangement of their personal appearance, especially in the trimming
of their hair and moustachios; but many of the women--I speak now of
Chicago--sacrificed everything to that awful American institution, the
"bang."

I know of no female head-dress in Asia, Africa, or Europe so absurd
in itself or so lunatic in the wearer as some of the Chicago bangs.
Ugliness of face is intensified a thousandfold by "the ring-worm style"
of head-dress with which they cover their foreheads and half their
cheeks. Prettiness of face can, of course, never be hidden; but I
honestly think that neither a black skin, nor lip-rings and nose-rings,
nor red teeth, nor any other fantastic female fashion that I have ever
seen in other parts of the world, goes so far towards concealing beauty
of features as that curly plastering which, from ignorance of its real
name, I have called "the ring worm style of bang."

Here, too, in Chicago I found a man selling "gophers." Now, I do not
know the American name for this vanish-into-nothing sort of pastry, but
I do know that there is one man in London who declares that he, and he
alone in all the world, is aware of the secret of the gopher. And all
London believes him. His is supposed to be a lost art--but for him--and
I should not be surprised if some lover of the antique were to bribe
him to bequeath the precious secret to an heir before he dies. But in
Chicago peripatetic vendors of this cate are an every-day occurrence,
and even the juvenile Ethiop sometimes compasses the gopher. What
its American name is I cannot say; but it is a very delicate kind of
pastry punched into small square depressions, and every mouthful you
eat is so inappreciable in point of matter that you look down on your
waistcoat to see if you have not dropped it, and when the whole is done
you feel that you have consumed about as much solid nutriment as a fish
does after a nibble at an artificial bait. Have you ever given a dog a
piece of warm fat off your plate and seen him after he had swallowed
it look on the carpet for it? So rapid is the transit of the delicious
thing that the deluded animal fancies that he has as yet enjoyed only
the foretaste of a pleasure still to be, the shadow only of the coming
event, the promise of something good. It is just the same with yourself
after eating a gopher.

Of course I went to see the stock-yards, and my visit, as it happened,
had something of a special character, for I saw a pig put through its
performances in thirty-five seconds. A lively piebald porker was one
of a number grunting and quarrelling in a pen, and I was asked to keep
my eye on him. And what happened to that porker was this. [1] He was
suddenly seized by a hind leg, and jerked up on to a small crane. This
swung him swiftly to the fatal door through which no pig ever returns.
On the other side stood a man--

  That two-handed engine at the door
  Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more,

and the dead pig shot across a trough and through another doorway,
and then there was a splash! He had fallen head first into a vat of
boiling water. Some unseen machinery passed him along swiftly to the
other end of the terrible bath, and there a water-wheel picked him
up and flung him out on to a sloping counter. Here another machine
seized him, and with one revolution scraped him as bald as a nut. And
down the counter he went, losing his head as he slid past a man with
a hatchet, and then, presto! he was up again by the heels. In one
dreadful handful a man emptied him, and while another squirted him
with fresh water, the pig--registering his own weight as he passed the
teller's box--shot down the steel bar from which he hung, and whisked
round the corner into the ice-house. One long cut of a knife made two
sides of pork out of that piebald pig. Two hacks of a hatchet brought
away his backbone. And there, in thirty-five seconds from his last
grunt--dirty, hot-headed, noisy--the pig was hanging up in two pieces,
clean, tranquil, iced!

The very rapidity of the whole process robbed it of all its horrors.
It even added the ludicrous to it. Here one minute was an opinionated
piebald pig making a prodigious fuss about having his hind leg taken
hold of, and lo! before he had even made up his mind whether to squeal
or only to squeak, he was hanging up in an ice-house, split in two! He
had resented the first trifling liberty that was taken with him, and in
thirty-five seconds he was ready for the cook!

That the whole process is virtually painless is beyond all doubt, for
it is only for the first fraction of the thirty-odd seconds that the
pig is sentient, and I doubt if even electricity could as suddenly and
painlessly extinguish life as the lightning of that unerring poniard,
"the dagger of mercy" and the instantaneous plunge into the scalding
bath.

Of the Chicago stock-yards, a veritable village, laid out with its
miniature avenues intersecting its mimic streets and numbered blocks,
it is late in the day to speak. But it was very interesting in its way
to see the poor doomed swine thoughtlessly grunting along the road, and
inquisitively asking their way, as it seemed, of the sheep in Block 9
or of the sulky Texan steer looking out between the palings of Block
7; to watch the cattle, wild-eyed from distress and long journeying,
snorting their distrust of their surroundings, and trying at every
opportunity to turn away from the terribly straight road that leads to
death, into any crossway that seemed likely to result in freedom; to
see for the first time the groups of Western herdsmen lounging at the
corners, while their unkempt ponies, guarded in most cases by drowsy
shepherd-dogs, stood tethered in bunches against the palings. All day
long the air is filled with porcine clamour, and some of the pens
are scenes of perpetual riot. For the pig does not chant his "nunc
dimittis" with any seemliness. His last canticles are frivolous. It
is impossible to translate them into any "morituri te salutant," for
they are wanting in dignity, and even self-respect. With the cattle
it is very different. But few of them were in such good case as to
make high spirits possible, and many were wretched objects to look
at. Dead calves lay about in the pens, and there was a general air of
distress that made the scene abundantly pathetic. But, after all, it
does not pay to starve or overdrive cattle, and we may confidently
expect therefore, that in Chicago, of all places in the world, they are
neither starved nor overdriven systematically.

The English sparrow has multiplied with characteristic industry in
Chicago, but further west I lost it. I saw none between Omaha and
Salt Lake City. So the sparrow line, I take it, must be drawn for
the present somewhere west of Clinton. I do not think it has crossed
the Mississippi yet from the east. But it is steadily advancing its
frontiers--this aggressive fowl--from both sea-boards, and just as it
has pushed itself forward from the Atlantic into Illinois, so from the
Pacific it has got already as far as Nevada. The tyranny of the sparrow
is the price men pay for civilization. Only savages are exempt. Here in
America, they have developed into a multitudinous evil, dispossessing
with a high hand the children of the soil, thrusting their Saxon
assumption of superiority upon the native feathered flock of grove and
garden, and driving them from their birthright. They have no respect
for authorities, and entertain no awe even for the Irish aldermen of
New York. In Australia it is the same. Imported as a treasure, they
have presumed upon the sentiment of exiled Englishmen until they have
become a veritable calamity. So they have been publicly proclaimed
as "vermin," and a price set upon their heads "per hundred." Indeed,
legislatures threaten to stand or fall upon the sparrow question. Here
in America, men and women began by putting nesting-boxes for the birds
in the trees and at corners of houses; I am much mistaken if before
long they do not end by putting up ladders against the trees to help
the cats to get up to catch the sparrows.

I looked everywhere for "Chicago Mountain"--a New England joke against
the Phoenix City--and at last found it behind a house at the corner of
Pine and Colorado streets. They say (in Boston) that Chicago, being
chaffed about having no high land near it, set to work to build itself
a mountain, but that when it had reached its present moderate elevation
of a few feet, the city abandoned the project. But I am inclined to
think that this fiction is due to the spite of the New Englanders, who,
it is notorious, have to sharpen the noses of their sheep to enable
them to reach the grass that grows between the stones; for on looking
at the mountain in question I perceived it to be merely a natural
sand-dune which it has not been thought worth while to clear away.
Further to acquaint myself with the city, I went into sundry "penny
gaffs," or cafés chantants, and found them to my surprise patronized
by groups of men sad almost to melancholy. It was the music, I think,
that made them feel so. Its effect on me I know was very chastening. I
felt inclined to lift up my voice and howl. But the intense gravity of
the company restrained me, and I left. Yet I am told that inside these
very places men stab each other with Bowie knives and shoot each other
with revolvers, and are even sometimes quite disagreeable in their
manners. But so far as my own experience goes I seldom saw a gathering
so unanimously solemn. I might even say so tearful. It is possible, of
course, that the music eventually maddens them, that it works them up
about midnight into a homicidal melancholy. But there was no profligacy
of blood-shedding while I was there.

They did not even offer to murder a musician.

Footnotes:

1. Need I say that I do not refer to the small field-rat of that name?



CHAPTER II.

FROM CHICAGO TO DENVER.

    Fathers of Waters--"Rich Lands lie Flat"--The Misery River--Council
    Bluffs--A "Live" town, sir--Two murders: a contrast--Omaha--The
    immorality of "writing up"--On the prairies--The modesty of
    "Wish-ton-Wish"--The antelope's tower of refuge--Out of Nebraska
    into Colorado--Man-eating Tiger.

FROM Chicago to Omaha by the Chicago and "Northwestern" route is not an
exhilarating journey. When Nature begins to make anything out here in
America she never seems to know when to stop. She can never make a few
of anything. For instance, it might have been thought that one or two
hundred miles of perfectly flat land was enough at a time. But Nature,
having once commenced flattening out the land, cannot leave off. So all
the way from Chicago to Omaha there is the one same pattern of country,
a wilderness of maize-stubble and virgin land, broken only for the
first half of the way by occasional patches of water-oak, and for the
second half of willows.

Just on the frontier-line of these two vegetable divisions of the
country lies a tract of bright turf-land. What a magician this same
turf is! It is Wendell Holmes, I think, who says that Anglo-Saxons
emigrate only "in the line of turf."

The better half of the journey passed on Sunday, and the people were
all out in loitering, well-dressed groups "to see the train pass," and
at the stations where we stopped, to see the passengers, too. Where
they came from it was not easy to tell, for the homesteads in sight
were very few and far between. Yet there they were, happy, healthy,
well-to-do contented-looking families, enjoying the Day of Rest--the
one dissipation of the hard-worked week. What a comfortable connecting
link with the outer world the railway must be to these scattered
dwellers on this prairie-land!

So through Illinois to the Mississippi. How wonderfully it resembles
the Indus where it flows past Lower Sind. A minaret or two, a
blue-tiled cupola and a clump of palms would make the resemblance of
the Mississippi at Clinton to the Indus below Rohri complete. And both
rivers claim to be "the Father of Waters." I would not undertake to
decide between them. In modern annals, of course, the American must
take pre-eminence; but what can surpass the historic grandeur that
dignifies the Indian stream?

And so into Iowa, just as flat, and as rich, and as monotonous as
Illinois, and with just the same leagues of maize-stubble, unbroken
soil, water-oaks and willows. And then, in the deepening twilight, to
Cedar Rapids, with the pleasant sound of rushing water and all the
townsfolk waiting "to see the train" on their way from church, standing
in groups, with their prayer-books and Bibles in their hands.

By the way, what an admirable significance there is in he care with
which these young townships discharge their duties to their religion
and the dead. The church or prayer-house seems to be always one of the
first and finest buildings. With only half-a-dozen homesteads in sight
in some places, there is the church and while all the rest are of the
humblest class of frame houses, the church is of brick. The cemeteries
again. Before even the plots round the living are set in order, "God's
acre" (often the best site in the neighbourhood) is neatly fenced and
laid out.

And I thought it somehow a beautiful touch of national character, this
reverent providence for the dead that are to come. And just before I
went to sleep, I saw out in the moonlit country a cemetery, and on the
crest of the rising ground stood one solitary tombstone, the pioneer
of the many--the first dead settler's grave. In this new country the
living are as yet in the majority!

Awakening, find myself still in Iowa, and Iowa still as flat as ever.
Not spirit enough in all these hundred miles of land to firk up even a
hillock, a mound, a pimple. But to make a new proverb, "Rich lands lie
flat;" and Iowa; in time, will be able to feed the world--aye, and to
clothe it too.

In the mean time we are approaching the Missouri, through levels in
which the jack-rabbit abounds, and every farmer, therefore, seems to
keep a greyhound for coursing the long-eared aborigines. The willows,
conscious of secret resources of water, are already in leaf, and
overhead the wild ducks and geese are passing to their feeding-grounds.
Here I saw "blue" grass for the first time, and I must say I am glad
that grass is usually green. Elsewhere in the States, English grass is
called "blue grass;" but in some parts, as here in this part of Iowa,
there is a native grass which is literally blue. And it is not an
improvement, so far as the effect on the landscape goes, upon the old
fashioned colour for grass. And then the Missouri, a muddy, shapeless,
dissipated stream. The people on its banks call it "treacherous," and
pronounce its name "Misery." It is certainly a most unprepossessing
river, with its ill-gotten banks of ugly sand, and its lazy brown
waters gurgling along in an overgrown, self-satisfied way. It is
a bullying stream; gives nobody peace that lives near it; and is
perpetually trying in an underhanded sort of way to "scour" out the
foundations of the hollow columns on which the bridges across it are
built. But the abundance of water-fowl upon its banks and side-waters
is a redeeming feature for all who care to carry a gun, and I confess
I should like to have had a day's leisure at Council Bluffs to go out
and have a shot. The inhabitants of the place, however, do not seem
to be goose-eaters, for, close season or not, I cannot imagine their
permitting flocks of these eminently edible birds to fly circling about
over their houses, within forty yards of the ground. The wild-goose
is proverbially a wary fowl, but here at Council Bluffs they have
apparently become from long immunity as impertinent and careless as
sparrows.

Council Bluffs, as the pow-wow place of the Red Men in the days when
Iowa was rolling prairie and bison used to browse where horses plough,
has many a quaint legend of the past; and in spite of the frame houses
that are clustered below them and the superb cobweb bridge--it has few
rivals in the world--that here spans the Missouri, the Bluffs, as the
rendezvous of Sagamore and Sachem, stand out from the interminable
plains eloquent of a very picturesque antiquity. And so to Omaha.

"But I guess, sir, Om'a's a live town. Yes, sir, a live town."

My experiences of Omaha were too brief for me to be just, too
disagreeable for me to be impartial. Before breakfast I saw a murder
and suicide, and between breakfast and luncheon a fire and several
dog-fights. Perhaps I might have seen something more. But a terrible
dust-storm raged in the streets all day. Besides, I went away.

I am beginning already to hate "live" towns.

I.

It was during the Afghan War. I had just ridden back from General
Roberts' camp in the Thull Valley, on the frontiers of Afghanistan, and
found myself stopped on my return at the Kohat Pass. "It is the orders
of Government," said the sentry: "the Pass is unsafe for travellers."

But I had to get through the Pass whether it was "safe" or not, for
through it lay the only road to General Browne's camp, to which I was
attached. So I dismounted, and after a great deal of palaver, partly of
bribes, partly of untruths, I not only got past the native sentries,
but got a guide to escort me, through the thirty miles of wild Afridi
defiles that lay before me. The scenery is, I think, among the finest
in the world, while, added to all is the strange fascination of the
knowledge that the people who live in the Pass have cherished from
generation to generation the most vindictive blood feuds. The villages
are surrounded by high walls, loopholed along the top, and the huts in
the inside are built against the wall, so that the roofs of them can
be used by the men of the village as lounges during the day, and as
ramparts for sentries during the night. Within these sullen squares
each clan lives in perpetual siege. The women and children are at all
times permitted to go to and fro; but for the men, woe to him who
happens to stray within reach of the jezails that lie all ready loaded
in the loopholes of the next village. The crops are sown and reaped by
men with guns slung on their backs, and in the middle of every field
stands a martello-tower, in which the peasants can take shelter if
neighbours sally out to attack them while at work. Rope-ladders hang
from a doorway half-way up the tower, and up this, like lizards, the
men scramble, one after the other, as soon as danger threatens, draw in
the ladder, and through the loop-holes overlook their menaced crops.

A wonderful country truly, and something in the air to day that makes
my guide ride as hard as the road will permit, with his sword drawn
across the saddle before him. My revolver is in my hand. And so we
clatter along, mile after mile, through the beautiful series of little
valleys, grim villages, and towers. Now and again a party of women will
step aside to let us pass, or a dog start up to bark at us, but not a
single man do we see. Yet I know very well that hundreds of men see us
ride by, and that a jezail is lying at every loophole, and covering the
very path we ride on.

We reach a sudden turn of the path; my guide gallops round it. He is
hardly out of my sight when Bang! bang! It is no use pulling up, and
the next instant I am round the corner too. A man, with his jezail
still smoking from the last shot, starts up from the undergrowth almost
under my horse's feet, and narrowly escapes being ridden down. Another
man comes running down the hillside towards him. In front of me, some
fifty yards off, is my guide, with his horse's head towards me and his
sword in his hand, and on the path, midway between us, lies a heap of
brightly-coloured clothing--a dead Afridi! For a second both guide
and I thought that it was we who had drawn the fire from the ambushed
men. But no, it the poor Afridi lad lying there in the path before
us, and the victim of a blood feud. He had tried, no doubt, to steal
across from his own village to some friendly hamlet close by, but his
lynx-eyed enemies had seen him, and, lying there on either side of his
path, had shot him as he passed.

But what a group we were! Myself, with my revolver in my hand, looking,
horror-stricken, now at the dead, and now at his murderers; my guide,
in the splendid uniform of the Indian irregular cavalry, emotionless as
only Orientals can be; the two murderers talking together excitedly; in
the middle of us the dead lad! But there was still another figure to be
added, for suddenly, along the very path by which the victim had come,
there came running an old woman--perhaps she had followed the lad with
a mother's tender anxiety for his safety--and in an instant she saw the
worst. Without a glance at any of us, she flung herself down with the
cry of a breaking heart, by the dead boys side, and as my guide turned
to ride on and I followed him, as the murderers slipped away into the
undergrowth, we all heard her crooning, between her sobs, over the body
of her murdered son.

II.

I was in Omaha. I had just crossed Thirteenth Street, and, turning to
look as I passed, at the Catholic church, had caught an idle glimpse of
the folk in the street. Among them was a woman at the wooden gateway of
a small house, hesitating, so it seemed to me afterwards, about pushing
it open, for though she had her hand upon the latch, yet she did not
lift it, but appeared to me, at the distance I passed and the cursory
glance I gave, to be listening to what somebody was saying to her
through the window. Had I been only a few yards nearer! At the moment
that I saw her, the wretched woman was gazing with fixed and horrified
eyes upon a face--a grim and cruel face--that glared at her from a
window, and at a gun that she saw was pointed full at her breast. And
the next instant, just as I had turned the corner, there was the report
of fire-arms. It did not occur to me to stop. But suddenly I heard a
cry, and then a second shot, and somehow there flashed upon my mind the
picture of that hesitating woman by the wicket, with her knitted shawl
over her head, and the wind blowing her light dress to one side.

I did not turn back, however. For the woman and the shots had only the
merest flash of a connexion in my mind. But after a few steps a man
came running past me, going perhaps for the doctor, or the police,
or the coroner, and the scared look on his face suddenly once more
wrenched back to my imagination the woman at the wicket.

So I turned back into Thirteenth Street, and there, in the middle of
the road, with a man stooping over her and two women, transfixed by
sudden terror into attitudes that were most tragic, I saw the woman
lying. Her face was turned up to the bright sunlit sky, her shawl had
fallen back about her neck, and her hair lay in the dust. She was
already dead. And her murderer? He too had gone to his last account;
and as I stood there in that dreary Omaha road, with the wind raising
wisps of dust about the horror-stricken group, and thought of the two
dead bodies lying there, one in the roadway, the other in the house
close by, my mind reverted involuntarily to the fancy that at that very
moment the two souls, man and wife, were standing before their Maker,
and that perhaps she, the poor mangled woman, was pleading for mercy
for the man, her husband, the lover of her youth--her murderer.

--

In the evening, when a cool breeze was blowing, and imagination
pictured the trees holding up screens of green foliage before the
hotel windows to shut out the ugly views of half-built streets, I
entertained feelings that were almost kindly towards Omaha; but the
memory of the day that was happily past, as often as it recurred to
me, changed them to gall again. All day long there had been a flaring,
glaring sun overhead and the wind that was blowing would have done
credit to the deserts through which I have since marched with the army
in Egypt. It went howling down the street with the voices of wild
beasts, and carried with it such simooms of sand as would probably
in a week overwhelm and bury in Ninevite oblivion the buildings of
this aspiring town. And not only sand, but whirlwinds of vulgar dust
also, with occasional discharges of cinders, that came rushing along
the road, picking up all the rubbish it could find, dodging up alleys
and coming out again with accumulations of straw, rampaging into
courtyards in search of paper and rags, standing still in the middle
of the roadway to whirl, and altogether behaving itself just as a
disreputable and aggressive vagabond may be always expected to behave.
Of course I was told it was a "very exceptional" day. It always is a
"very exceptional day" wherever a stranger goes. But I must confess
that I never saw any place--except Aden, and perhaps East London, in
South Africa--that struck me on short acquaintance as so thoroughly
undesirable for a lengthened abode. The big black swine rooting about
in the back yards, the little black boys playing drearily at "marbles"
with bits of stone, the multitude of dogs loafing on the sidewalks, the
depressing irregularity Of the streets, the paucity of shade-trees,
the sandy bluffs that dominate the town and hold over the heads of
the inhabitants the perpetual threat of siroccos, and the general
appearance (however false it may have been) of disorder--all combined
with various degrees of force to give the impression that Omaha is a
place that had from some cause or another been suddenly checked in its
natural expansion.

Its geographical position is indisputably a commanding one, and already
the great smelting works, with one exception the busiest in the States,
the splendid workshops of the Union Pacific Railway, and the thriving
distillery close by, give promise of the great industries which in the
future this town, with its wonderful advantages of communication, as
the meeting-point of great railway high-roads, will attract to itself.
Omaha has an admirable opera-house, and when its hotel is rebuilt it
will be able to offer visitors good accommodation. It has also an
imposing school-house imposingly advertised by being on top of a hill,
and the refining grace of gardens is not completely absent, while the
"stove-pipe" hat gives fragmentary evidence of advanced civilization.
But all this affords encouragement for the future only; at present
Omaha is a depressing spot. And so I left the town without regret; but
I did not make any effort to shake off the dust of Omaha. That was
impossible; it had penetrated the texture of my clothing so completely
that nothing but shredding my garments into their original threads
would have sufficed.

Now I had read something of Omaha before I went there, had seen it
called "a splendid Western city," and been invited to linger there
to examine its "dozens of noble monuments to invincible enterprise,"
which, with "the dozen or more church spires," are supposed to break
the sky-line of the view of this "metropolis of the North-western
States and Territories." It is possible, therefore, that my profound
disappointment with the reality, after reading such exaggerated
description, may have tinged my opinion of Omaha, and, combined with
the unfortunately "exceptional" day I spent there, have made me think
very poorly of the former capital of Nebraska. That it has a great
future before it, its position alone guarantees, and the enterprise
of Nebraska puts beyond all doubt; but the sight-seer going to Omaha,
and expecting to find it anything but a very new town on a very
unprepossessing site, will be as greatly disappointed as I was.

Equally unfortunate is the "writing up" which the Valley of the Platte
has received. Who, for instance, that has travelled on the railway
along that great void can read without annoyance of "beautiful valley
landscapes, in which thousands of productive farms, fine farm-houses,
blossoming orchards, and thriving cities" are features of the country
traversed? No one can charge me with a want of sympathy with the
true significance of this wonderful Western country. And I can say,
therefore, without hesitation that the dreariness of the country
between Omaha and Denver Junction is almost inconceivable. There is
hardly even a town worth calling such in sight, much less "thriving
cities." The original prairie lies there spread out, on either hand,
in nearly all its original barrenness. Interminable plains, that
occasionally roll into waves, stretch away to the horizon to right and
left, dotted with skeletons of dead cattle and widely scattered herds
of living ones. Here and there a cow-boy's shed, and here and there a
ranch of the ordinary primitive type, and here and there a dug-out,
are all the "features" of the long ride. An occasional emigrant waggon
perhaps breaks the dull, dead monotony of the landscape, and in one
place there is a solitary bush upon a mound. A hawk floats in the air
above a prairie-dog village. A plover sweeps past with its melancholy
cry.

No, the journey to North Platte--where a very bad breakfast was put
before us at a dollar a head--is not attractive. But here again it is
the Possible in the future that makes the now desolate scene so full
of interest and so splendidly significant. As a grazing country it
can never, perhaps, be very populous; but in time, of course, those
ranches, now struggling so bravely against terrible odds, will become
"fine farm-houses," and have "blossoming orchards" about them. But as
yet these things are not, and for good, all-round dreariness I would
not know where to send a friend with such confidence as to the pastures
between Omaha and North Platte.

Oh! when are we to have Pullman palace balloons? Condemned to travel,
my soul and my bones cry out for air-voyaging.

That some day man should fly like a bird has been, in spite of
superstition, an article of honest belief from the beginning of time,
and in the dove of Archytas alone we have proof enough that, even in
those days, the successful accomplishment of flight was accepted as a
fact of science. During the Middle Ages so common was this belief that
every man who dabbled in physics was pronounced a magician, and as such
was credited with the power of transporting himself through the air
at will. Some, indeed, actually claimed the enviable privilege, Friar
Bacon among others. But history records no practical illustration of
their control of the air, while more than one death is chronicled of
daring men who, with insufficient apparatus, launched themselves in
imitation of birds upon space, and fell, more or less precipitately, to
earth. The Italian who flapped himself off Stirling Castle trusted only
to a pair of huge feather wings, which he had tied on to his arms, and
got no farther on his way to France than the heads of the spectators
at the bottom of the wall; while the Monk of Tübingen started on his
journey from the top of his tower with apparatus that immediately
turned inside out, and increased by its weight the momentum with which
he came down plumb into the street.

Beyond North Platte the same melancholy expanses again commence, the
same rolling prairies, with the same dead cattle and the same herds of
live ones, an occasional waggon or a stock-yard or snow-fence being
all that interrupts the flat monotony. But approaching Sterling a
suspicion of verdure begins in places to steal over the grey prairie,
and flights of "larks," with a bright, pleasant note, give something
of an air of animation to isolated spots. Here is a plough at work,
the first we have passed, I think, since we left Omaha, and the plover
piping overhead seem to resent the novelty. Cattle continue to dot the
landscape, and all the afternoon the Platte rolls along a sluggish
stream parallel to the track.

The train happened to slacken pace at one point, and a man came up to
the cars. He was a beggar, and asked our help to get along the road
"eastward." One of his arms was in a sling from an accident, and his
whole appearance eloquent of utter destitution. And the very landscape
pleaded for him. Beggary at any time must be wretchedness, but here in
this bleak waste of pasturage it must almost be despair. And as the
train sped on, the one dismal figure creeping along by the side of the
track, with the dark clouds of a snowstorm coming up to meet him, was
strangely pathetic.

And then Sterling. May Sterling be forgiven for the dinner it set
before us!

And then on again, across long leagues of level plain, thickly studded
with prickly pear patches and seamed with the old bison and antelope
tracks leading down from the hills to the river. There are no bison
now. They cannot stand before the stove-pipe hat. The sombreroed
hunter, with his lasso, the necklace of death, was an annoyance to
them; they spent their lives dodging him. The befeathered Indian, "the
chivalry of the prairie," who pincushioned their hides full of arrows,
was a terror to them, and they fell by thousands. But before the
stove-pipe hat the bison fled incontinently by the herd, and have never
returned.

The prairie-dogs peep out of their holes at us as we passed. The
bashfulness of "Wish-ton-Wish," as the Red Man calls the prairie-dog,
is as nearly impudence as one thing can be another. It sits up perkily
on one end at the edge of its hole till you are close upon it, and
then, with a sudden affectation of being shocked at its own immodesty,
dives headlong into its hole; but its hind-legs are not out of sight
before the head is up again, and the next instant there is the
prairie-dog sitting exactly where you first saw it! Such a burlesque of
shyness I never saw in a quadruped before.

A solitary coyote was loitering in a hungry way along a gulch, and I
could not help thinking how the most important epochs of one's life
may often turn upon the merest trifles. Now, here was a coyote ambling
lazily up a certain gulch because it had happened to see some white
bones bleaching a little way up it. But in the very next gulch, which
the coyote had not happened to go up, were three half-bred greyhounds
idling about, just in the humour for something to run after. But they
could not see the coyote, though it was really only a few yards off,
nor could the coyote see them. So the dogs lounged about in a listless,
do-nothing, tired-of-life sort of way, thinking existence as dull
as ditch water, while the coyote, unconscious of the narrow escape
of its life that it ran, trotted slowly along--scrutinized the old
bones--scratched its head--yawned out of sheer ennui, and then trotted
along again. Now, what a difference it would have made to those three
dogs if they had only happened to loaf into the next gulch! And what
a prodigious difference it would have made to the coyote if it had
happened to loaf into the next gulch!

The prickly pear, that ugly, fleshy little cactus, with its sudden
summer glories of crimson and golden blossoms, fulfils a strange
purpose in the animal economy of the prairies. In itself it appears to
be one of the veriest outcasts among vegetables, execrated by man and
refused as food by beast. Yet if it were not for this plant the herds
of prairie antelope would have fared badly enough, for the antelope,
whenever they found themselves in straits from wolves or from dogs,
made straight for the prickly pear patches and belts, and there,
standing right out on the barren, open plain, defied their swift but
tender-footed pursuers to come near them. For the small, thick pads
of the cactus, though they lie so flat and insignificantly upon the
ground, are studded with tufts of strong, fierce spines, and woe to the
wolf or the dog that treads upon them. The antelope's hoofs, however,
are proof against the spines, and one leap across such a belt suffices
to place the horned folk in safety. These patches and belts, then, so
trivial to the eye, and in some places almost invisible to the cursory
glance, are in reality Towers of Refuge to the great edible division of
the wild prairie nations, and as impassable to the eaters as was that
girdle of fire and steel which Von Moltke buckled so closely round the
city of the Napoleons.

But here we are approaching Denver. The cottonwood has mustered into
clusters, a prototype of the future of these now scattered ranches.
Dotted about here and there in suitable corners, on river bank or under
sheltering bluff, single trees are growing side by side with single
stockyards or single cow-boys' huts, but every now and again, where
nature offers them a good site for a colony, the trees congregate,
select lots, and permanently locate. It is not very different after
all, with human beings.

Nature here is undoubtedly tempting, and Denver itself must surely be
one of the most beautiful towns in the States. Through great reaches
of splendid farm-land, with water in abundance and the cottonwood and
willow growing thickly, we pass to our destination as the twilight
settles on the country.

A whole day has again been spent in the train! We had awaked in the
morning to see from the car windows the people of Nebraska going out
to their day's work in the fields, and here in the evening we sit and
watch the Colorado folk coming home to their rest after the day's work
is over. Truly this steam is a Latter-Day apocalypse and this America a
land of magnificent distances.

I found out on this trip that my fellow-travellers (and the fact holds
good nearly all over America) took the greatest interest in British
India, and finding that I had spent so many years there, they plied me
with questions. On some journeys it would be the political aspect of
our government of Hindostan that interested, at others the commercial
or the social. But going through Colorado, one of the haunts of the
"grizzly" and the "mountain lion," I had to detail my experiences of
sport in India. Above all, the tiger interested them. It is the only
animal in the world that may be said to give the grizzly a point or
two. And there are some even who deny this; but I, who have shot the
tiger, and never seen a grizzly, naturally concede the first place in
perilous courage to Stripes, the raja of the jungle. In one particular
aspect, at any rate, the tiger is supreme among quadrupeds. It has the
splendid audacity to make man his regular food.

Now, it is generally supposed that the "man-eater" is a specially
formidable variety of the species; that it is only the boldest,
strongest, and fiercest of the tigers that preys on man. But the very
reverse is of course the truth. When hale and strong the tiger avoids
the vicinity of men, finding abundant food in the herds of deer and
other wild animals that share his jungles. But when strength and speed
of limb begin to fail, the brute has to look for easier prey than the
courageous bison or wind-footed antelope, and so skulks among the
ravines and waste patches of woodland that are to be found about nearly
every village. Then when twilight obscures the scene, he creeps out
noiseless as a shadow, and lies in ambush in a crop of standing grain
or bhair-tree brake, and watches the country folk go by from the fields
in twos and threes, driving their plough cattle before them. After a
while, there comes sauntering past alone, a man or a woman who has
lagged behind the company; yet not so far behind but that the friends
ahead can hear the scream which tells of the tiger's leap, though too
far for help to be of use. During four years 350 human beings and
24,000 head of cattle were killed by these animals in one district in
Bombay, while many single tigers have been known to destroy over a
hundred people before they were shot. One in the Mandla district caused
the desertion of thirteen villages and threw out of cultivation two
hundred and fifty square miles of country; while another, only one of
many similar cases, was credited with the appalling total of eighty
human victims per annum! The yearly loss in cattle and by decrease
of cultivation through the ravages of these fearful beasts has been
estimated at ten million pounds sterling!

No wonder, then, that even these doughty grizzly-slayers of the Rockies
respect the tiger's name.



CHAPTER III.

IN LEADVILLE.

    The South Park line--Oscar Wilde on sunflowers as food--In a
    wash-hand basin--Anti-Vigilance Committees--Leadville the city of
    the carbonates--"Busted" millionaires--The philosophy of thick
    boots--Colorado miners--National competition in lions--Abuse of the
    terms "gentleman" and "lady"--Up at the mines--Under the pine-trees.

STARTING from Denver for Leadville in the evening, it seemed as if
we were fated to see nothing of the very interesting country through
which the South Park line runs. At first there is nothing to look at
but open prairie land sprinkled with the homesteads of agricultural
pioneers, but as the moon got up there was gradually revealed a
stately succession of mountain ridges, and in about two hours we
found ourselves threading the spurs of the Sangre di Christi range
and following the Platte River up toward its sources. Crossing and
recrossing the cañon, with one side silvered, and the other thrown
into the blackest shadow by the moon, and the noisy stream tumbling
along beside us in its hurry to get down to the lazy levels of the
great Nebraska Valley, I saw glimpses of scenery that can never be
forgotten. It was fantastic in the extreme; for apart from the jugglery
of moonlight, in itself so wonderful always, the ideas of relative
distance and size, even of shape, were upset and ridiculed by the snowy
peaks that here and there thrust themselves up into the sky and by the
patches and streaks of snow that concealed and altered the contour of
the nearer rocks in the most puzzling manner imaginable. And all this
time the little train--for the line is narrow-gauge--kept twisting and
wriggling in and out as if it were in collusion with the hills, and
playing into their hands to disconcert the traveller.

I have seen at different times great curiosities of engineering, as
in travelling over the Ghats in Western India, where everything is
stupendous and at times even terrific, where danger seems perpetual and
disaster often inevitable. In passing by train from Colombo to Kandy
in Ceylon, and crossing Sensation Rock, the railway cars actually hang
over the precipice, so that when you look out of the window the track
on which you are running is invisible, and you can drop an orange plumb
down the face of this appalling cliff on to the tops of the palm-trees,
which look like little round bushes in the valley down below. From
Durban to Pietermaritzburg again, on the line along which, when it
was first opened, the engine-driver brought out from England refused
to take his train, declaring it to be too dangerous, but along which,
nevertheless, the British troops going up to Zululand were all safely
carried. The South Park line, however, can compare with these, and must
be accepted as one of the acknowledged triumphs of railway enterprise.
For much of its length the rocks had to be fought inch by inch, and
they died hard. The result to-day is a very picturesque and interesting
ride, with a surprise in every mile and beauty all the way.

On the way to the "City of the Carbonates," I heard much of Leadville
ways and life. That very morning the energetic police of the town had
arrested two young ladies for parading the sunflower and the lily too
conspicuously. One had donned a sunflower for a hat, the other walked
along holding a tall lily in her hand. The Leadville youth had gathered
in disorderly procession behind the aesthetic pair. So the police
arrested the fair causes of the disturbance.

I told Oscar Wilde of this a few days later. "Poor sweet things!"
said he; "martyrs in the cause of the Beautiful." He was on his way
to Salt Lake City at the time, and I told him how the Mormon capital
was par excellence "the city of sunflowers," and assured him that the
poet's feeding on "gilliflowers rare" was not, after all, too violent
a stretch of imagination, as whole tribes of Indians (and Longfellow
himself has said that every Indian is a poem, which is very nearly
the same thing as a poet) feed on the sunflower. The Apostle of Art
Decoration was delighted.

"Poor sweet things!" said he; "feed on sunflowers! How charming! If
I could only have stayed and dined with them! But how delightful to
be able to go back to England and say that I have actually been in a
country where whole tribes of men live on sunflowers! The preciousness
of it!"

It is a fact, probably new to some of my readers: that the wild
sunflower is the characteristic weed of Utah, and that the seeds of the
plant supply the undiscriminating Red Man with an oil-cake which may
agreeably vary a diet of grasshoppers and rattlesnakes, but has not
intrinsically any flavour to recommend it. So South Kensington must not
rush away with the idea that the noble savage who has the Crow for his
"totem," feeds upon the blossoms of the vegetable they worship. It is
the prosaic oil-cake that the Pi-ute eats.

But all I heard got mixed up eventually into a general idea that every
man in the place who had not committed a murder was a millionaire, and
all those who had not lost their lives had lost a fortune. The mines,
too, got gradually sorted up into two kinds--those that had "five
million now in sight, sir," or those whose "bottoms had fallen out."
But one fact that pleased me particularly was the "Anti-Vigilance"
Committee of Leadville. Every one knows that a "Vigilance Committee"
consists of a certain number of volunteer guardians of the peace, who
call (with a rope) upon strangers visiting their neighbourhood and
offer them the choice of being hanged at once for the offences they
purpose committing or of going elsewhere to commit them. The strangers,
as it transpires in the morning, sometimes choose one course and
sometimes the other. This is all very right and proper, and conduces to
a general good understanding. But in Leadville, the citizens started an
anti-vigilance committee and so the Vigilance Committee sent in their
resignations to themselves--and accepted them. I do not think I ever
heard of a fact so appalling in its significance. But the humour of it
is that the Anti-Vigilance Committee managed somehow to keep the peace
in Leadville as it had never been kept before.

It reminded me of an incident of the Afghan war. A certain tribe of
hill-men persisted in killing the couriers who carried the post from
one British camp to the other, and the generals were nearly at their
wits' end for means of communication, when the murderers sent in word
offering to carry the post themselves--and did so, faithfully!

It was in Leadville also that lived the barber who, going forth one
night, was met by two men who told him peremptorily to take his hands
out of his pockets, as they intended to take out all the rest. But he
had nothing in his pockets except two Derringers, so he pulled his
hands out and shot the two men dead where they stood. Next morning
the citizens of Leadville placed the barber in a triumphal chair, and
carried him round the town as a bright example to the public, presented
him with a gold watch and chain as a testimonial of their esteem for
his courage--and then escorted him the first stage out of the town,
advising him never to return.

But this was in the Leadville of the very remote past--1880 or
thereabouts--and not in the Carbonate City of the present, 1882. The
town is now as quiet as such a town can be, a wonderfully busy place
and a picturesque one.

And while my companions talked I sat in the wash-hand basin and smoked.
Why the wash-hand basin? Because there was nowhere else to sit.
The "smoking-car" of this particular train happened to be also the
gentlemen's lavatory, a commodious snuggery measuring about eight feet
by five. And as there were only eight smokers on board we were not so
crowded as we should have been if there had been eighteen, and then,
you see, we made more room still by two of the eight staying away. For
the rest, two of us sat in the wash-hand basins, one on a stool between
our legs, another on a stool with his knees against the gentlemen
opposite, and the balance stood. We were an example of tight packing
even to the proverbial sardine. But I found the water-tap at the edge
of the basin an inconvenient circumstance. I would venture to suggest
to American railway companies that for the comfort of smokers when
sitting in the basins they should place these taps a little farther
back.

I suppose I ought to give some mining statistics about Leadville. But
the very fact that I shall be neglecting an obvious duty if I omit all
statistics, nearly decides me to omit them. The deliberate neglect of
an obvious duty is, however, a luxury which only the very virtuous
can indulge in; and to compromise therefore with the situation, I
would state that the mining output of Leadville is to-day about eleven
times as great as it was two years ago, and that five years ago there
was no output at all. That is to say, this town of Leadville, with a
population, floating and permanent together, of some 40,000 souls, and
yielding from its mines about a thousand dollars per head of the total
population, was five years ago a camp of a few hundred miners, as a
rule so disappointed with the prospect of the place that another year
of the status quo would have seen Leadville deserted. But the secret
of the carbonates being "ore-iferous" was discovered, and Tabor, like
the fossil of some antediluvian giant, was gradually revealed by the
pick of the miner, in all his Plutocratic bulk. A few years ago he
was selling peanuts at the corner of a street. To-day he moves about,
king of Denver, with Leadville for an appanage. His potentiality in
cheques increases yearly by another cipher added to the total, and
drags at each remove a lengthening chain of wealth. Why do men go on
accumulating money when they are already masters of enough? Surely it
is better to be rich than a pauper? But in Colorado this is not the
general opinion. Men there prefer to be ruined rather than be merely
rich. And the result is that you could hardly throw a boot out of the
hotel window without hitting an ex-millionaire. Not that I would advise
anybody to go throwing boots promiscuously out of hotel windows in
Leadville. You would run a good chance of following your boots.

"Do you see that man there, paring his boot with a knife?" asked my
companion.

"Yes," said I, "I see him; there is a good deal of him to see."

"Well," said he, "that's So-and-so. He sold so-and-so for $400,000
about a year ago. But he busted last Fall. And if you get into
conversation with him, he'll be glad to borrow a dollar from you."

"Then I shall not get into conversation with him," I replied.

"And do you see that old fellow on the other side, leaning against the
hitching post, outside the Post Office?"

"Well," said I, "they seem to be mostly leaning against the
hitching-post, but I presume you mean the gentleman in the middle."

"Yes," was the reply. "That's So-and-so. He struck the so-and-so, got
$80,000 for his share about six weeks ago--and is busted."

And so on ad infinitum. The problem was a very puzzling one to me at
first--why do such men make fortunes if they take the first opportunity
of throwing them away? But the solution, I fancy, is this--that these
men do not care for money. It is to them what knowledge is to the
philosopher, a means of acquiring more--worthless in itself, but, as
leading to larger results, worthy of all eagerness in its pursuit.
They do not put Wealth before themselves as an accumulation of current
coins, capable of purchasing everything that makes life materially
pleasant. They contemplate it merely in the bulk. Much in the same way
a whaler never thinks of the number of candles in the spermaceti into
which he has struck a harpoon. He looks at his quarry only as a "ten
barrel" or a "fifteen barrel" whale, as the case may be. He does not
content himself with the illuminating potentialities of the creature
he pursues. He is only anxious as to how it will barrel off, and the
barrels might be pork, or potatoes, or anything else. So with the
man who goes out mine-hunting. He harpoons a lode, lays open so many
"millions" of ore, sells it to a company for a "million" or two, and
straightway goes and "busts" for so many "millions." It does not seem
to concern such a one that a "million" of dollars is so many guineas,
or roubles, or napoleons, or mohurs, and so forth, and that if he goes
on to the end of his life, he can never achieve more than money. His
arithmetic goes mad, and he begins computing from the wrong end of the
line. Ten thousands of dollars make one 50-cent piece, two 50-cent
pieces make one quarter, five quarters make one nickel, five nickels
make one cent, and "quite a lot" of cents make one fortune. So at it he
goes again, trying to foot up a satisfactory balance with thousands for
units--and "busts" before he gets to the end of the sum.

Leadville itself as I first saw it, ringed in with snow-covered hills,
a bright sun shining and a slight snow falling, remains in my memory
as one of the prettiest scenes in my experience. In Switzerland even
it could hold its own, and triumph. I wandered about its streets and
into its shops and saloons, curious to see some of those men of whom
I had heard so much; but whatever may have been their exercises with
bowie-knife and pistol at a later hour of the day, I was never more
agreeably disappointed than by the manners and bearing of the Leadville
miners early in the morning.

There is nothing gives a man so much self-reliance as having thick
boots on. This fact I have evolved out of my own consciousness, for
when I was out in the Colonies I often tried to analyze a certain sense
of "independence" which I found taking possession of me. The climate
no doubt was exceptionally invigorating, and I was a great deal on
horseback. But I had been subjected to the same conditions elsewhere
without experiencing the same results. And after a great deal of severe
mental inquiry, I decided that it was--my thick boots! And I was right.
No man can feel properly capable of taking care of himself in slippers.
In patent-leather boots he is little better, and in what are called
"summer walking-shoes" he still finds himself fastidious about puddles,
and at a disadvantage with every man he meets who does not mind a rough
road. But once you begin to thicken the sole, self-reliance commences
to increase, and by the time your boots are as solid as those of a
Colorado miner you should find yourself his equal in "independence."
And some of their boots are prodigious. The soles are over an inch
thick, project in front of the toes perhaps half an inch, and form a
ledge, as it were, all round the foot. What a luxury with such boots it
must be to kick a man!

The rest of the costume was often in keeping with the shoe leather, and
in every case where the wearers did not belong to the shops and offices
of the town, there was a general attention to strength of material and
personal comfort, at a sacrifice of appearance, which was refreshing
and unconventional. They are a fine set, indeed, this miscellaneous
congregation of nationalities which men call "Colorado diggers." There
is hardly a stupid face among them, and certainly not a cowardly one.
And then compare them with the population of their native places--the
savages of the East of London, the outer barbarians of Scandinavia, the
degraded peasantry of Western Ireland! The contrast is astonishing.
Left in Europe they might have guttered along in helpless poverty
relieved only by intervals of crime, till old age found them in a
workhouse. But here they can insist on every one pretending to think
them "as good as himself" (such is, I believe, the formula of this
preposterous hypocrisy), and, at any rate, may hope for sudden wealth.
Above all, a man here does not go about barefooted, like so many of
his family "at home," or in ragged shoe-leather, like so many more of
them; but stands, and it may even be sleeps, in boots of unimpeachable
solidity. So he goes down the street as if it were his own, planting
his feet firmly at every step, and, not having to trouble himself about
the condition of the footway, keeps his head erect. Depend upon it,
thick boots are one of the secrets of "independence" of character.

But Leadville, this wonderful town that in four years sprang up from
300 to 30,000 inhabitants, is not entirely a city of miners. On the
day that I was there larger numbers than usual were in the streets, in
consequence of an election then in progress holding out promises of
unusual entertainment. Besides these there is, of course, the permanent
population of commerce and ordinary business; and I was struck here, as
I had not been before since I left Boston, with the natural phenomenon
of a race reverting to an old type. Boston reminded me at times of some
old English cathedral city. Leadville was like some thriving provincial
town. The men would not have looked out of place in the street, say,
of Reading; while the women, in their quiet and somewhat old-fashioned
style of dressing, reminded me very curiously of rural England. Indeed,
I do not think my anticipations have ever been so completely upset
as in Leadville. All the way from New York I have been told to wait
"till I got to Colorado" before I ventured to speak of rough life, and
Leadville itself was sometimes particularized to me as the Ultima Thule
of civilization, the vanishing-point of refinement.

But not only is Leadville not "rough;" it is even flirting with the
refinements of life. It has an opera-house, a good drive for evening
recreation, and a florist's shop. There were not many plants in it, it
is true, but they were nearly all of them of the pleasant old English
kinds--geraniums, pansies, pinks, and mignonette. Two other shops
interested me, one stocked with mineral specimens--malachite, agate,
amethyst, quartz, blood-stone, onyx, and an infinite variety of pieces
of ore, gold, silver, lead, iron, copper, bismuth, and sulphur--with
which pretty settings are made, of a quaint grotto-work kind, for
clocks and inkstands. The other a naturalist's shop, in which, besides
fossils, exquisite leaves in stone and petrified tree-fragments, I
found the commencement of a zoological collection--the lynx with its
comfortable snow-coat on, and the grey mountain wolf not less cozily
dressed; squirrels, black and grey, "the creatures that sit in the
shade of their tails," and the "friends of Hiawatha" with various
birds--the sage hen and the prairie chicken, the magpie (very like the
English bird), and the "lark,"--a very inadequate substitute indeed for
the bird that "at Heaven's gate sings," that has been sanctified to
all time by Shelley, and the idol of the poets of the Old World--and
heads of large game, horned and antlered, and the skin of a "lion."
It is a curious fact that every country should thus insist on having
a lion. For the real African animal himself I entertain only a very
qualified respect. For some of his substitutes, the panther of Sumatra
and the Far East, the (now extinct) cat of Australia, and the puma of
the United States, that respect is even more moderate in degree. "The
American lion" is, in fact, about as much like the original article as
the American "muffin" is like the seductive but saddening thing from
which it takes its name. The puma, which is its proper name, is the
least imposing of all the larger cats. It cannot compare even with the
jaguar, and would not be recognized by the true lion, or by the tiger,
as being a kinsman. It is just as true of lions as it is of Glenfield
starch--"when you ask for it, see that you get it." I admit that it is
very creditable to America that in the great competition of nations
she should insist on not being left behind even in the matter of
lions, but surely it would be more becoming to her vast resources and
her undeniable enterprise if she imported some of the genuine breed,
instead of, as at present, putting up with such a shabby compromise as
the puma.

This tendency to exaggeration in terms has I know been very frequently
commented upon. But I don't remember having heard it suggested that
this grandiosity must in the long-run have a detrimental effect
upon national advancement. Presuming for instance that an American
understands the real meaning of the word "city," what gross and
ridiculous notions of self-importance second-class villages must
acquire by hearing themselves spoken of as "cities." Or supposing that
one understands the real meaning of the word "lady," how comes it that
an ill-bred, ill-mannered chambermaid is always spoken of as a "lady"?
If the name is only given in courtesy, why not call them princesses at
once and rescue the nobler word from its present miserable degradation?

I was in the Chicago Hotel and a coloured porter was unstrapping my
luggage. I rang the bell for a message boy, and on another black
servant appearing I gave him a written note to take down to the
manager. But in that insolent manner so very prevalent among the
blacker hotel servants in America, he said: "That other gentleman will
take it down." "Other gentleman!" I gasped out in astonishment; "there
is only one gentleman in this room, and two negro servants. And if," I
continued, forgetting that I was in America, and rising from my chair,
"you are not off as fast as you can go, I'll--" But the "gentleman"
fled so precipitately with my message that I got no further.

Now could anything be more preposterous than this poor creature's
attempt to vindicate his right to the flattering title conferred upon
him by the Boots, and which he in turn conferred upon the Barman, until
everybody in the hotel, from the Manager downwards, was involved in an
absurd entanglement of mutual compliments? It may of course be laughed
at as a popular humour. But a stranger like myself is perpetually
recognizing the mischief which this absurd want of moral courage and
self-respect in the upper classes is working in the country. Nor
have Americans any grounds whatever to suppose that this sense of
"courtesy" is peculiar to them. It is common to every race in the
world, and most conspicuous in the lowest. The Kaffirs of Africa and
the Red Indians address each other with titles almost as fulsome as
"gentleman," while in India, the home of courtesy and good breeding,
the natives of the higher castes address the very lowest by the title
of Maharaj("great prince"). It is accepted by the recipient exactly in
the spirit in which it is meant. He understands that the higher classes
do not wish to offend him by calling him by his real name, and his
Oriental good taste tells him that any intermediate appellation might
be misconstrued. So he calls himself, as he is called, by the highest
title in the land. There is no danger here of any mistake. Every one
knows that the misfortune of birth or other "circumstances beyond
his control" have made him a menial. But no one tells him so. He is
"Maharaj."

For myself, I adopted the plan of addressing every negro servant as a
"Sultan." It was not abusive and sounded well. He did not know what it
meant any more than he knows the meaning of "gentleman," but I saved my
self-respect by not pretending to put him on an equality with myself.

At Leadville the hotel servants are white men, and the result is
civility. But I was in the humour at Leadville to be pleased with
everything. The day was divine, the landscape enchanting, and the men
with their rough riding-costumes, strange, home-made-looking horses,
Mexican saddles (which I now for the first time saw in general use) and
preposterous "stirrups," interested me immensely. Of course I went up
to a mine, and, of course, went down it. And what struck me most during
the expedition? Well, the sound of the wind in the pine-trees.

It was a delightful walk--away up out of the town, with its suburbs of
mimic pinewood "chalets" and rough log-huts, and the hills all round
sloping back from the plateau so finely, patched and powdered with
snow-drifts, fringed and crowned with pine-trees, here darkened with
a forest of them, there dotted with single trees, and over all, the
Swiss magic of sunlight and shadow; away up the hill-side, through a
wilderness of broken bottles and battered meat cans, a very paradise
of rag-pickers, among which are scattered the tiny homes of the
miners. Women were busy chopping wood and bringing in water. Children
were romping in parties. But the men, their husbands and fathers,
were all up at the mines at work, invisible, in the bowels of the
mountain; keeping the kobolds company, and throwing up as they went
great hillocks of rubbish behind them like some gigantic species of
mole, or burrowing armadillo of the old glyptodon type. And so on, up
the shingle-strewn hillside thickly studded with charred tree-stumps,
desolation itself--a veritable graveyard of dead pine-trees. Above
us, on the crest of the mountain, the forest was still standing, and
long before we reached them we heard the wind-haunted trees of Pan
telling their griefs to the hills. It is a wonderful music, this of
the pine-trees, for it has fascinated every people among whom they
grow, from the bear-goblin haunts of Asiatic Kurdistan through the
elf-plagued forests of Germany to the spirit-land of the Canadian
Indians. It is indeed a mystery, this voice in the tree-tops, with all
the tones of an organ--the vox-humana stop wonderful--and in addition
all the sounds of nature, from the sonorous diapason of the ocean to
the whisperings of the reed-beds by the river. When I came upon them
in Leadville the pines were rehearsing, I think, for a storm that was
coming. Lower down the slope, the trees were standing as quiet as
possible, and in the town itself at the bottom of the hill the smoke
was rising straight. But up here, at the top, under the pine-trees,
the first act of a tempest was in full rehearsal. And all this time
wandering about, I had not seen one single living soul. There stood the
sheds built over the mines. But no one was about. At the door of one
of them was a cart with its horses. But no driver. This extraordinary
absence of life gave the hill-top a strange solemnity--and though I
knew that under my feet the earth was alive with human beings, and
though every now and then a little pipe sticking out of a shed would
suddenly snort and give about fifty little angry puffs at the rate
of a thousand a minute, the utter solitude was so fascinating that I
understood at once why pine-covered mountains, especially where mines
are worked, should all the world over be such favourite sites in legend
and ballad for the home of elfin and goblin folk.

The afternoon was passing before I set out homeward and I could hardly
get along, so often did I turn round to look back at the views behind
me. And in front, and on either side, were the hills, with their hidden
hoards of silver and lead, watching the town, whence they know the
miners will some day issue to attack them, and on their slopes lay
mustered the shattered battalions of their pines, here looking as if
invading the town, into which their skirmishers, dotted about among the
houses, had already fought their way; there, as if they were retreating
up the hillside with their ranks closed against the houses that pursued
them, or straggling away up the slopes and over the crest in all the
disorder of defeat.

And so, down on to the level of the plateau again, with its traffic and
animation and all the busy life of a hardworking town.



CHAPTER IV.

FROM LEADVILLE TO SALT LAKE CITY.

    What is the conductor of a Pullman Car?--Cannibalism fatal to
    lasting friendships--Starving Peter to feed Paul--Connexion
    between Irish cookery and Parnellism--Americans not smokers--In
    Denver--"The Queen City of the Plains"--Over the Rockies--Pride in
    a cow, and what came of it--Sage-brush--Would ostriches pay in the
    West?--Echo canyon--The Mormons' fortifications--Great Salt Lake in
    sight.

WHAT is the "conductor" of a Pullman car? Is he a private gentleman
travelling for his pleasure, a duke in disguise, or is he a servant
of the company placed on the cars to see to the comfort, &c., of the
company's customers? I should like to know, for sometimes I have been
puzzled to find out. The porter is an admirable institution, when he
is amenable to reason, and I have been fortunate enough to find myself
often entrusted to perfectly rational specimens. The experiences of
travellers have, as I know from their books, been sometimes very
different from mine--ladies, especially, complaining--but for myself I
consider the Union Pacific admirably manned.

But it is a great misfortune that the company do not run hotel cars.
I was told that the reason why we were made over helplessly to such
caterers as those at North Platte and Sterling for our food was, that
the custom of passengers is almost the only source of revenue the
"eating-houses" along the line can depend upon. Without the custom of
passengers they would expire--atrophise--become deceased. What I want
to know is why they should not expire. I, as a traveller, see no reason
whatever, no necessity, for their being kept alive at a cost of so
much suffering to the company's customers. Let them decease, or else
establish a claim to public support. During a long railway journey the
system is temporarily deranged and appetites are irregular, so that
some people can not eat when they have the opportunity, and when they
could eat, do not get it. Some day, no doubt, a horrible cannibalic
outrage on the cars will awaken the directors to the peril of carrying
starving passengers, and the luxury of the hotel-car will be instituted.

Not that I could censure the poor men of the South Seas or Central
Africa for eating each other. There seems to me something a trifle
admirable in this economy of their food. But cannibalism must, in the
very nature of it, be deterrent to the formation of lasting friendships
between strangers. So long as two men look upon each other as possible
side dishes, there can be no permanent cordiality between them. Mutual
confidence, the great charm of sincere friendship, must be wanting. You
could never be altogether at your ease in a company which discussed the
best stuffing for you.

Meanwhile, the custom of carrying their own provisions is increasing in
favour among passengers, so that, hotel cars or not, these Barmecide
"eating-houses" may yet expire from inanition. The waiting (done by
girls) is, I ought to say, admirable--but then so it was at Sancho
Panza's supper and at Duke Humphrey's dinner-table. And yet the hungry
went empty away.

Between Cheyenne and Ogden the commissariat is distinctly better, and
the unprovided traveller triumphs mildly over the more careful who have
carried their own provisions. But, striking a balance on the whole
journey, there is no doubt that the comfort of the trip, some sixty odd
hours, from Omaha to Ogden, is materially increased by starting with a
private stock of food. Bitter herbs without indigestion is better than
a stalled ox with dyspepsia.

An old Roman epicure gravely expressed his opinion that Africa could
never be a progressive country, inasmuch as its shrimps were so small.
And I think I may venture to say that if the cookery in the central
States does not improve, the country must gradually drift backwards
into barbarism. For there is a most intimate connexion between cookery
and civilization.

It is the duty of the historian, and not the task of the traveller,
to trace national catastrophes to their real causes--often to be
found concealed under much adventitious matter, and when found often
surprising from their insignificance--and I leave it, therefore, to
others to specify the particular feature of Irish cookery that tends to
create a disinclination to paying rent.

That the agitated demeanour of the after-dinner speakers during Irish
tenant-right meetings' was due solely to the infuriating and ferocious
course of food to which they had just submitted, is as certain as that
the extraordinary class of noises, cavernous and hollow-sounding,
produced by their applausive audiences was owing to the fact that they
had not dined at all. In the West of Ireland (where I travelled with
those "experts in constitutional treason" who were then organizing the
"No Rent" agitation), the agitators and conspirators had no time for
long dinners, as the mobs outside were as impatient as hunger, so they
sat down, invariably, to everything at once--mutton, bacon, sausages,
turkey and ham, with relays of hot potatoes every two minutes. While
one conspirator was addressing the peasantry, the upper half of his
body thrust out of the lower half of the window, and only his legs in
the dining-room, the rest were eating against time, and as soon as the
speaker's legs were seen to get up on tiptoe, which they always did for
the peroration, the next to speak had to rise from his food. The result
was of course incoherent violence. But a closer analysis is required to
detect the causes of Irish dislike to rent.

That it would be eventually found that potatoes and patriotism have
an occult affnity I have no doubt; but, as I have said above, such
research more properly belongs to the province of the historian. The
Spartan stirring his black broth with a spear revealed his nature at
once, and the single act of the Scythians, using their beefsteaks
for saddles until they wanted to eat them, gives at a glance their
character to the nation.

At any rate, it is as old as Athenaeus that "to cookery we owe
well-ordered States;" for States result from the congregation of
individuals in towns, and towns are the sum of agglomerated households,
and households, it is notorious, never combine except for the sociable
consumption of food. So long as, in the Dark Ages, every man cooked
for himself, or, in the primitive days of cannibalism, helped himself
to a piece of a raw neighbour, there could be no friendly heartiness
at meals; but, as soon as cooks appeared, men met fearlessly round a
common board, towns grew up round the dinner-table, and, as Athenaeus
remarks, well-ordered States grew up round the towns. But if we were
to judge of the prospects of the people who live, say, about Green
River or North Platte, by the character of the food (as supplied to
travellers) the opinion could not be very complimentary or encouraging.

It is a prevalent idea in England that Americans smoke prodigiously,
even as compared with "the average Britisher." Now, in America there
is very little smoking. You may perhaps think I am wrong. A great many
Americans, I allow, buy cigars in the most reckless fashion. But (apart
from the fact that cigars are not necessarily tobacco) I find that as
a rule they throw away more than they smoke. Speaking roughly, then, I
should say so-called "smokers" in this country might be divided into
three classes: those who buy cigars because they cost money; those
who buy them because cigars give them a decent excuse for spitting;
and those who buy them under the delusion that the friend who is with
them smokes, and that hospitality or courtesy requires that they
should humour his infatuation. Of the trifling residue, the men who
smoke because, as they put it, "they like it," it is not worth while
to speak. Now, one of the results of this general aversion to tobacco
is that when a foreigner addicted to the weed comes over and tries to
smoke, he is hunted about so, that (as I have often done myself) he
longs to be in his coffin, if only to get a quiet corner for a pipe. In
hotels they hunt you down, floor by floor, till they get you on to a
level with the street, and then from room to room till they get you out
on to the pavement. There is nowhere where you can read and smoke--or
write and smoke--or have a quiet chat with a friend over a pipe--or in
fact smoke at all, in the respectable, civilized, Christian sense of
the word. Of course, if you like, you can "smoke" in the public hall
of the hotel. But I would just as soon sit out on the kerbstone at the
corner of the street as among a crowd of men holding cigars in their
mouths and shouting business. Out on the kerbstone I should at any rate
find the saving grace of passing female society. In private houses
again, smokers are consigned to the knuckle end of the domicile and
the waste corners thereof, as if they snatched a fearful joy from some
secret fetish rites, or had to go apart into privacy to indulge in a
little surreptitious cannibalism. In the streets, friends do not like
you to smoke when with them, and there are very few public conveyances
in which tobacco is comfortably possible.

In trains there is a most conspicuous neglect of smokers. I found, for
instance, on my journey from New York to Chicago, that the only place I
could smoke in was the end compartment of the fourth car from my own.
That is to say, let it be as stormy and dark as it may, you have to
pass from other car to the other half the length of the train, and when
you do get to "the smoking compartment" you find it is only intended to
hold five passengers. I confess I am surprised that these palace cars,
otherwise so agreeable, should be such hovel cars for smokers. Nor, by
the way, seeing that the company specially notifies that the passage
from one car to the other is "dangerous" while the train is in motion,
do I think it fair that smokers should be encouraged, and indeed
compelled, to run bodily risks in order to arrive at their tobacco.
Some day no doubt there will be Pullman smoking cars, and when there
are--I will find something else to grumble at.

Imagine then my astonishment when arriving at the Windsor Hotel at
Denver, I was shown into a bona-fide smoking-room, with cosy chairs,
well carpeted, with a writing table properly furnished, all the
newspapers of the day, and a roaring fire in an open fireplace! Here
at last was civilization. Here was a room where a man might sit with
self-respect, and enjoy his pipe over a newspaper, smoke while he wrote
a letter, foregather over tobacco with a friend in a quiet corner! No
noise of loquacious strangers, no mob of outsiders to make the room
as common as the street, no fusillade of expectoration, no stove to
desiccate you--above all, no coloured "gentleman" to come in and say,
"Smoke nut 'lard here, sar!" I was delighted. But my curiosity, at such
an aberration into intelligence, led me to confide in the manager.

"How is it," I asked, "you have got what no other hotel in America that
I have stayed in has got--a comfortable smoking-room after the English
style?"

"Guess," said he, "because an English company built this hotel!"

And I went upstairs, at peace with myself and all English companies.

The first view of Denver is very prepossessing, and further
acquaintance begets better liking. Indeed on going into the streets of
"the Queen City of the Plains" I was astonished. The buildings are of
brick or stone, its roads are good and level, and well planted with
shade-trees, its suburbs are orderly rows of pretty villas, adorned
with lawn, and shrubs, and flowers. Though one of the very youngest
towns of the West, it has already an air of solidity and permanence
which is very striking, while on such a day as I saw it, it is also
one of the very cleanest and airiest. And the snow-capped hills are in
sight all round.

Particularly notable in Denver are its railway station--and yet,
with all its size, it is found too small for the rapidly increasing
requirements of the district--and the Tabor Opera-House. This is really
a beautiful building inside, with its lavish upholstery, its charming
"ladies' rooms," and smoking-rooms, its variety of handsome stone, its
carved cherry-wood fittings, its perfectly sumptuous boxes. The stage
is nearly as large as that at Her Majesty's, quite as large as any in
New York, while in general appointments and in novelty of ornaments,
it has very few rivals in all Europe. In one point, the beauty of the
mise-en-scene from the gallery, the Denver house certainly stands quite
alone, for whereas in all other theatres or opera-houses, "the gods"
find themselves up in the attics, as it were, with only white-washed
walls about them, and the sides of the stage shut out from view, here
they are in handsomely furnished galleries, with a clear view of the
whole stage over the tops of the pagoda-roofed boxes--these curious
"pepper-box" roofs being themselves a handsome ornament to the scene.
By having only a limited number of "stalls" on the level, sloping the
"pit" up to the "grand tier," and making the stage nearly occupy the
whole width of the house, everybody in the building gets an equally
good view of the stage. It is indeed an opera-house to be proud of; and
Denver is proud of it.

There is an idea sometimes mooted that Denver has been run on too fast;
that it has "seen its day," and may be as suddenly deserted as it has
been peopled. But there is absolutely no chance of this whatever.
Colorado is as yet only in its cradle, and the older it gets the more
substantial will Denver become, for this city--and very soon it will
be almost worthy of that name--is the Paris of "the Centennial State,"
the ultimate ambition of the moderately successful miner. It is not a
place to make your money in and leave. But having made your money, to
go to and live in. For a man or woman must be very fastidious indeed
who cannot be content to settle down in this, one of the prettiest and
healthiest towns I have ever visited. Denver accordingly is attracting
to it, year by year, a larger number of that class of citizens upon
which alone the permanent prosperity of a town can depend, the men of
moderate capital, satisfied with a fair return from sound investments,
who put their money into local concerns, and make the place their
"home."

I left Denver in the early morning. Outside the station were standing
five trains all waiting to be off, and one by one their doleful bells
began to toll, and one by one they sneaked away. Ours was the last to
be off; but at length we too got our signal: that is to say, the porter
picked up the stool which is placed on the platform for the convenience
of short-legged passengers stepping into the cars--and without a word
we crept off, as if the train was going to a funeral, or was ashamed
of something it had done. This silent, casual departure of trains
is a perpetually recurring surprise to me. Would it be contrary to
republican principles to ring a bell for the warning of passengers? One
result, however, of this surreptitious method of making off, is that
no one is ever left behind. Such is the perversity of human nature! In
England people are being perpetually "left behind" because they think
such a catastrophe to be impossible. In America they are never left
behind, because they are always certain they will be.

At first the country threatened a repetition of the old prairie, made
more dismal than ever by our recent experiences of the Switzerland of
Colorado. But the scene gradually picked up a feature here and there as
we went along, and knowing that we were climbing up "the Rockies," we
had always present with us the pleasures of hope. But if you wish to
see the Rocky Mountains so as to respect them, do not travel over them
in a train. They are a fraud, so far as they can be seen from a car
window. But in minor points of interest they abound. Curious boulders,
of immense size and wonderful shapes, lie strewn about the ground, all
water-worn by the torrents of a long-ago age, and some of them pierced
with holes--the work of primeval shell-fish. Beds of river gravel
cover the slopes, and on every side were abundant vestiges of deluges,
themselves antediluvian. And then we came upon isolated cliffs of red
sandstone, with kranzes running along their faces--exactly the same
kranzes as the Zulus made such good use of during the war--and showing
in their irregular bases how old-world torrents had washed away the
clay and softer materials that had once no doubt joined these isolated
cliffs together into a chain of hills, and had left the sandstone heart
of each hill bare and alone. And so on, up over "the Divide" into
Wyoming, still a paradise for the ride and the rod, past Cheyenne, a
town of many shattered hopes, and out into the region of snow again.

Our engine was perpetually screaming to the cattle to get off the
track, a series of short, sharp screams that ought to have sufficed
to have warned even cattle to get out of the way. As a rule they
recognized the advisability of leaving the rails, but one wretched
cow, whether she was deaf, or whether she was stupid, or whether, like
Cole's dog, she was too proud to move, I cannot say, but in spite of
the screams of the engine she held her ground and got the worst of the
collision. The cow-catcher struck her, and as we passed her, the poor
beast lay in the blood-mottled snow-drift at the bottom of the bank,
still breathing, but almost dead. As for the train, the cow might have
been only a fly.

And so we went on climbing--herds of cattle grazing on the slopes, and
in the splendid "parks" which lay stretched out beneath us wherever
the hills stood far apart--with frequent snow-sheds interrupting all
conversation or reading with their tunnel-like intervals, till we
reached the Red Granite canyon, with great masses of that splendid
stone fairly mobbing the narrow course of a mountain stream, and
beyond them snow--snow--snow, stretching away to the sky-line without
a break. And then Sherman, the highest point of the mountains
upon the whole line--only some 8000 feet though, all told--with a
half-constructed monument to Oakes Ames crowning the summit. When
finished, this massive cone of solid granite blocks will be sixty feet
high. And then on to the Laramie Plains, with some wonderful reaches
of grazing-ground, and almost fabulous records of ranching profits,
And here is Laramie itself, that will some day be a city, for timber
and minerals and stock will all combine to enrich it. But to-day it is
desolate enough, muffed up in winter, with snowbirds in great flights
flecking the white ground. And so out again into the snow wilderness,
here and there cattle snuffing about on the desolate hill-sides, and
snow-sheds--timber-covered ways to prevent the snow drifting on to the
track--becoming more frequent, and the white desolation growing every
mile more utter. And the moon got up to confuse the horizon of land
with the background of the sky. And so to sleep, with dreams of the
Arctic regions, and possibilities, the dreariest in the world, of being
snowed up on the line.

Awakening with snow still all round us, and snow falling heavily as we
reach Green River. And then out into a country, prodigiously rich, I
was told, in petroleum, but in which I could only see that sage-brush
was again asserting its claims to be seen above the snow-drift, and
that wonderful arrangements in red stone thrust themselves up from
the hill crests. Terraces reminding me of miniature table-mountains
such as South Africa affects; sharply scarped pinnacles jutting from
the ridges like the Mauritius peaks; plateaux with isolated piles
of boulders; upright blocks shaped into the semblance of chimneys;
crests broken into battlements, and--most striking mimicry of all snow
wildernesses--a reproduction in natural rock of the great fortress of
Deeg, in India. With snow instead of water, the imitation of that vast
buttressed pile was singularly exact, and if there had been only a
brazen sun overhead and a coppery sky flecked with circling kites, the
counterfeit would have been perfect. But Deeg would crumble to pieces
with astonishment if snow were to fall near it, while here there was
enough to content a polar bear.

What a pity sage brush--the "three-toothed artemisia" of science--has
no commercial value. Fortunes would be cheap if it had. But I heard at
Leadville that a local chemist had treated the plant after the manner
of cinchona, and extracted from its bark a febrifuge with which he
was about to astonish the medical world and bankrupt quinine. That it
has a valuable principle in cases of fever, its use by the Indians
goes a little way to prove, while its medicinal properties are very
generally vouched for by its being used in the West as an application
for the cure of toothache, as a poultice for swellings, and a lotion
("sage oil") for erysipelas, rheumatism, and other ailments. Some day,
perhaps, a fortune will be made out of it, but at present its chief
value seems to be as a moral discipline to the settler and as covert
for the sage-hen.

Would not the ostrich thrive upon some of these prodigious tracts of
unalterable land? Can all America not match the African karoo shrub,
which the camel-sparrow loves? Ostrich farming has some special
recommendations, especially for "the sons of gentlemen" and others
disinclined for arduous labour, who have not much of either money or
brains to start with. Is it not a matter of common notoriety that when
pursued this fowl buries its head in the sand, and thus, of course,
falls an easy prey to the intending farmer? If, on the other hand,
he does not want the whole of the bird, he has only to stand by and
pluck its feathers out, which, having its head buried, it cannot, of
course perceive. (These feathers fetch a high price in the market.)
Supposing, however, that the adventurous emigrant wishes to undertake
ostrich farming bona fide, he has merely to pull the birds out from the
sand, and drive them into an enclosure--which he will, of course, have
previously made--and sit on the gate and watch them lay their eggs.
When they lay eggs, ostriches--this is also notorious--bury them in the
sand and desert them, and the gentleman's son on the fence can then
go and pick them out of the sand. (Ostriches' eggs fetch five pounds
apiece.) These birds, moreover, cost very little for feeding, as they
prefer pebbles. They can, therefore, be profitably cultivated on the
sea beach. But I would remind intending farmers that ostriches are very
nimble on their feet. It is also notorious that they have a shrewd way
of kicking. A kick from an ostrich will break a cab-horse in two. The
intending farmer, therefore, when he has compelled the foolish bird to
bury its head in the sand and is plucking out its tail feathers, should
stand well clear of the legs. This is a practical hint.

We dined at Evanston, neat-handed abigails, as usual, handing round
dishes fearfully and wonderfully made out of old satchels and seasoned
with varnish. There is a Chinese quarter here, with its curious
congregation of celestial hovels all plastered over with, apparently,
the labels of tea-chests. I should think the Chinese were all self-made
men. At any rate they do not seem to me to have been made by any one
who knew how to do it properly.

However, we had not much time to look at them, for cows on the track
and one thing and another had made us rather late; so we were very soon
off again, the travellers, after their hurried and indigestible meal,
feeling very much like the jumping frog, after he couldn't jump, by
reason of quail shot.

The snow had been gradually disappearing, and as we approached Echo
canyon we found ourselves gliding into scenes that in summer are very
beautiful indeed, with their turf and willow-fringed streams and
abundant vegetation. And then, by gradual instalments of rock, each
grander than the next, the great canyon came upon us. What a superb
defile this is! It moves along like some majestic poem in a series of
incomparable stanzas. There is nothing like it in the Himalayas that I
know of, nor in the Suleiman range. In the Bolan Pass, on the Afghan
frontier, there are intervals of equal sublimity; and even as a whole
it may compare with it. But taken all for all--its length (some thirty
miles), its astonishing diversity of contour, its beauty as well as
its grandeur--I confess the Echo canyon is one of the masterpieces
of Nature. I can speak of course only of what I have seen. I do not
doubt that the Grand canyon in Arizona, which is said to throw all the
wonders of Colorado and the marvels of Yellowstone or Yosemite into
the shade, would dwarf the highway to Utah, but within my experience
the Echo is almost incomparable. It would be very difficult to convey
any idea of this glorious confusion of crags. But imagine some vast
city of Cyclopean architecture built on the crest and face of gigantic
cliffs of ruddy stone. Imagine, then, that ages of rain had washed away
all the minor buildings, leaving only the battlements of the city, the
steeples of its churches, its causeways and buttresses, and the stacks
of its tallest chimneys still standing where they had been built. If
you can imagine this, you can imagine anything, even Echo canyon--but I
must confess that my attempt at description does not recall the scene
to me in the least.

However, I passed through it and, up on the crest of a very awkward
cliff for troops to scale under fire, had pointed out to me the
stone-works which the Mormons built when they went out in 1857 to stop
the advance of the Federal army.

And there is no doubt of it that the passage of that defile, even with
such rough defences as the Saints had thrown up, would have cost the
army very dear. For these stone-works, like the Afghans' sunghums, and
intended, of course for cover against small arms only, were carried
along the crest of the cliffs for some miles, and each group was
connected with the next by a covered way, while in the bed of the
stream below, ditches had been dug (some six feet deep and twenty
wide), right across from cliff to cliff, and a dam constructed just
beyond the first ditch which in an hour or two would have converted
the whole canyon for a mile or so into a level sheet of water. On
this dam the Mormon guns were masked, and though, of course, the
Federal artillery would soon have knocked them off into the water, a
few rounds at such a range and raking the army--clubbed as it would
probably have been at the ditches--must have proved terribly effective.
This position, moreover, though it could be easily turned by a force
diverging to the right before it entered the canyon, could hardly be
turned by one that had already entered it. And to attempt to storm
those heights, with men of the calibre of the Transvaal Dutchmen
holding them, would have been splendid heroism--or worse.

And then Weber canyon, with its repetitions of castellated cliffs, and
its mimicry of buttress and barbican, bastion and demilune, tower and
turret, and moat and keep, and all the other feudal appurtenances of
the fortalice that were so dear to the author of "Kenilworth," with
pine-trees climbing up the slopes all aslant, and undergrowth that
in summer is full of charms. The stream has become a river, and fine
meadows and corn-land lie all along its bank; large herds of cattle
and companies of horses graze on the hill slopes, and wild life is
abundant. Birds are flying about the valley under the supervision of
buzzards that float in the air, half-mountain high, and among the
willowed nooks parties of moor-hens enjoy life. And so into Ogden.

Night was closing in fast, and soon the country was in darkness.
Between Ogden and the City of the Saints lay a two hours' gap of
dulness, and then on a sudden I saw out in front of me a thin white
line lying under the hills that shut in the valley.

"That, sir? That is Salt Lake."



CHAPTER V.

THE CITY OF THE HONEY-BEE.

    Zion--Deseret--A City of Two Peoples--"Work" the watchword of
    Mormonism--A few facts to the credit of the Saints--The text of the
    Edmunds Bill--In the Mormon Tabernacle--The closing scene of the
    Conference.

I HAVE described in my time many cities, both of the east and west; but
the City of the Saints puzzles me. It is the young rival of Mecca, the
Zion of the Mormons, the Latter-Day Jerusalem. It is also the City of
the Honey-bee, "Deseret," and the City of the Sunflower--an encampment
as of pastoral tribes, the tented capital of some Hyksos, "Shepherd
Kings"--the rural seat of a modern patriarchal democracy; the place
of the tabernacle of an ancient prophet-ruled Theocracy--the point
round which great future perplexities for America are gathering fast;
a political storm centre--"a land fresh, as it were, from the hands of
God;" a beautiful Goshen of tranquility in the midst of a troublous
Egypt--a city of mystery, that seems to the ignorant some Alamut or
"Vulture's Nest" of an Assassin sect; the eyrie of an "Old Man of
the Mountains:"--to the well-informed the Benares of a sternly pious
people; the templed city of an exacting God--a place of pilgrimage
in the land of promise, the home of the "Lion of Judah," and the
rallying-point in the last days of the Lost Tribes, the Lamanites, the
Red Indians--the capital of a Territory in which the people, though
"Americans," refuse to make haste to get rich; to dig out the gold and
silver which they know abounds in their mountains; to enter the world's
markets as competitors in the race of commerce--a people content with
solid comfort; that will not tolerate either a beggar or a millionaire
within their borders, but insist on a uniform standard of substantial
well-being, and devote all the surplus to "building up of Zion," to
the emigration of the foreign poor and the erection of splendid places
of ceremonial worship--a Territory in which the towns are all filled
thick with trees and the air is sweet with the fragrance of fruit and
flowers, and the voices of birds and bees as if the land was still
their wild birthright; in which meadows with herds of cattle and horses
are gradually overspreading deserts hitherto the wild pashalik of the
tyrant sage-brush--a land, alternately, of populous champaign and
of desolate sand waste, with, as its capital, a City of Two Peoples
between whom there is a bitterness of animosity, such as, in far-off
Persia, even Sunni and Shea hardly know.

Indeed, there are so many sides to Salt Lake City, and so much that
might be said of each, that I should perhaps have shirked this part of
my experiences altogether were I not conscious of possessing, at any
rate, one advantage over all my "Gentile" predecessors who have written
of this Mecca of the West. For it was my good fortune to be entertained
as a guest in the household of a prominent Mormon Apostle, a
polygamist, and in this way to have had opportunities for the frankest
conversation with many of the leading Mormons of the territory. My
candidly avowed antipathy to polygamy made no difference anywhere I
went, for they extended to me the same confidence that they would have
done to any Gentile who cared to know the real facts.

In the ordinary way, I should begin by describing the City itself.
But even then, so subtle is the charm of this place--Oriental in its
general appearance, English in its details--that I should hesitate to
attempt description. Its quaint disregard of that "fine appearance"
which makes your "live" towns so commonplace; its extravagance in
streets condoned by ample shade-trees; its sluices gurgling along by
the side-walks; its astonishing quiet; the simple, neighbourly life of
the citizens--all these, and much more combine to invest Salt Lake City
with the mystery that is in itself a charm.

Speaking merely as a traveller, and classifying the towns which I
have seen, I would place the Mormon Zion in the same genus as Benares
on the Ganges and Shikarpoor in Sinde, for it attracts the visitor
by interests that are in great part intellectual. The mind and eye
are captivated together. It is a fascination of the imagination as
well as of the senses. For the capital of Utah is not one of Nature's
favourites. She has hemmed it in with majestic mountains, but they
are barren and severe. She has spread the levels of a great lake, but
its waters are bitter, Marah. There is none of the tender grace of
English landscape, none of the fierce splendour of the tropics; and
yet, in spite of Nature, the valley is already beautiful, and in the
years to come may be another Palmyra. As yet, however, it is the day of
small things. Many of the houses are still of adobe, and they overlook
the trees planted to shade them. Wild flowers still grow alongside
the track of the tram-cars, and wild birds perch to whistle on the
telephone wires in the business thoroughfares.

But the future is full of promise, for the prosperity of the city is
based upon the most solid of all foundations, agricultural wealth, and
it is inhabited by a people whose religion is work. For it is a fact
about Mormonism which I have not yet seen insisted upon, that the first
duty it teaches is work, and that it inculcates industry as one of the
supreme virtues.

The result is that there are no pauper Mormons, for there are no idle
ones. In the daytime there are no loafers in the streets, for every man
is afield or at his work, and soon after nine at night the whole city
seems to be gone to bed. A few strangers of course are hanging about
the saloon doors, but the pervading stillness and the emptiness of the
streets is dispiriting to rowdyism, and so the Gentile damns the place
as being "dull." But the truth is that the Mormons are too busy during
the day for idleness to find companionship at night, and too sober in
their pleasures for gaslight vices to attract them.

As a natural corollary to this life of hard work, it follows that the
Mormons are in a large measure indifferent to the affairs of the world
outside themselves. Minding their own business keeps them from meddling
with that of others. They are, indeed, taught this from the pulpit.
For it is the regular formula of the Tabernacle that the people should
go about their daily work, attend to that, and leave everything else
alone. They are never to forget that they are "building up Zion," that
their day is coming in good time, but that meanwhile they must work
"and never bother about what other people may be doing." In this way
Salt Lake City has become a City of Two Peoples, and though Mormon and
Gentile may be stirred up together sometimes, they do not mingle any
more than oil and water.

There are no paupers among the Mormons, and 95 per cent of them live in
their own houses on their own land; there is no "caste" of priesthood,
such as the world supposes, inasmuch as every intelligent man is a
priest, and liable at any moment to be called upon to undertake the
duties of the priests of other churches--but without any pay.

Last winter there was a census taken of the Utah Penitentiary and the
Salt Lake City and county prisons with the following result:--In Salt
Lake City there are about 75 Mormons to 25 non-Mormons: in Salt Lake
county there are about 80 Mormons to 20 non-Mormons. Yet in the city
prison there were 29 convicts, all non-Mormons; in the county prison
there were 6 convicts all non-Mormons. The jailer stated that the
county convicts for the five years past were all anti-Mormons except
three!

In Utah the proportion of Mormons to all others is as 83 to 17. In the
Utah Penitentiary at the date of the census there were 51 prisoners,
only 5 of whom were Mormons, and 2 of the 5 were in prison for
polygamy, so that the 17 per cent "outsiders" had 46 convicts in the
penitentiary, while the 83 per cent. Mormons had but 5!

Out of the 200 saloon, billiard, bowling alley and pool-table keepers
not over a dozen even profess to be Mormons. All of the bagnios and
other disreputable concerns in the territory are run and sustained by
non-Mormons. Ninety-eight per cent of the gamblers in Utah are of the
same element. Ninety-five per cent of the Utah lawyers are Gentiles,
and 98 per cent of all the litigation there is of outside growth and
promotion. Of the 250 towns and villages in Utah, over 200 have no
"gaudy sepulchre of departed virtue," and these two hundred and odd
towns are almost exclusively Mormon in population. Of the suicides
committed in Utah ninety odd per cent are non-Mormon, and of the Utah
homicides and infanticides over 80 per cent are perpetrated by the 17
per cent of "outsiders."

The arrests made in Salt Lake City from January 1, 1881, to December 8,
1881, were classified as follows:--

  Men..........................782
  Women........................200
  Boys..........................38
       Total..................1020

  Mormons--Men and boys........163
  Mormons--Women.................6
  Anti-Mormon--Men and boys....657
  Anti-Mormon--Women...........194
       Total..................1020

A number of the Mormon arrests were for chicken, cow, and water
trespass, petty larceny, &c. The arrests of non-Mormons were 80 per
cent for prostitution, gambling, exposing of person, drunkenness,
unlawful dram-selling, assault and battery, attempt to kill, &c.

Now, if the 75 per cent Mormon population of Salt Lake City were as
lawless and corrupt as the record shows the 25 per cent non-Mormons to
be, there would have been 2443 arrests made from their ranks during
the year 1881, instead of 169; while if the 25 per cent non-Mormon
population were as law-abiding and moral as the 75 per cent Mormons,
instead of 851 non-Mormon arrests during the year, there would have
been but 56!

These are the kind of statistics that non-Mormons in Salt Lake City
hate having published. But the world ought to know them, if only to
put to shame the so-called Christian community of Utah, that is never
tired of libelling, personally and even by name, the men and women whom
Mormons have learned to respect from a lifetime's experience of the
integrity of their conduct and the purity of their lives--the so-called
"Christian" community that is afraid to hear itself contrasted with
these same Mormons, lest the shocking balance of crime and immorality
against themselves should be publicly known. But there is no appeal
from these statistics. They are incontrovertible.

The time at which I arrived in Utah was a very critical one for the
Latter-Day Saints. The States, exasperated into activity by sectarian
agitation--and by the intrigues of a few Gentiles resident in Utah who
were financially interested in the transfer of the Territorial Treasury
from Mormon hands to their own--had just determined, once more, to
extirpate polygamy, and the final passage of the long-dreaded "Edmunds
Bill" had marked down Mormons as a proscribed people, and had indicted
the whole community for a common offence.

The following is the text of this remarkable bill:--

"Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That section 5352 of
the Revised Statutes of the United States be, and the same is hereby,
amended so as to read as follows, namely:

"Every person who has a husband or wife living who, in a territory or
other place over which the United States have exclusive jurisdiction,
hereafter marries another, whether married or single, and any man who
hereafter simultaneously, or on the same day, marries more than one
woman, in a territory or other place over which the United States have
exclusive jurisdiction, is guilty of polygamy, and shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $500 and by imprisonment for a term of
not more than five years; but this section shall not extend to any
person by reason of any former marriage whose husband or wife by such
marriage shall have been absent for five successive years, and is not
known to such person to be living, and is believed by such person to
be dead, nor to any person by reason of any former marriage which
shall have been dissolved by a valid decree of a competent court, nor
to any person by reason of any former marriage which shall have been
pronounced void by a valid decree of a competent court, on the ground
of nullity of the marriage contract.

"SEC. 2--That the foregoing provisions shall not affect the prosecution
or punishment of any offence already committed against the section
amended by the first section of this act.

"SEC. 3--That if any male person, in a territory or other place over
which the United States have exclusive jurisdiction, hereafter cohabits
with more than one woman, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanour,
and on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both said
punishments, in the discretion of the court.

"SEC. 4--That counts for any or all of the offences named in sections
one and two of this act may be joined in the same information or
indictment.

"SEC. 5--That in any prosecution for bigamy, polygamy, or unlawful
cohabitation, under any statute of the United States, it shall be
sufficient cause of challenge to any person drawn or summoned as a
juryman or talesman, first, that he is or has been living in the
practice of bigamy, polygamy or unlawful cohabitation with more than
one woman, or that he is or has been guilty of an offence punishable
by either of the foregoing sections, or by section 5352 of the
Revised Statutes of the United States, or the Act of July 1st, 1862,
entitled, 'An Act to punish and prevent the practice of polygamy in the
territories of the United States and other places, and disapproving and
annulling certain Acts of the Legislative Assembly of the Territory
of Utah;' or second, that he believes it right for a man to have more
than one living and undivorced wife at the same time, or to live in
the practice of cohabiting with more than one woman; and any person
appearing or offered as a juror or talesman, and challenged on either
of the foregoing grounds, may be questioned on his oath as to the
existence of any such cause of challenge, and other evidence may be
introduced bearing upon the question raised by such challenge; and this
question shall be tried by the court. But as to the first ground of
challenge before mentioned, the person challenged shall not be bound
to answer if he shall say upon his oath that he declines on the ground
that his answer may tend to criminate himself; and if he shall answer
as to said first ground, his answer shall not be given in evidence in
any criminal prosecution against him for any offence named in sections
one or three of this Act; but if he declines to answer on any ground,
he shall be rejected as incompetent.

"SEC. 6--That the President is hereby authorized to grant amnesty to
such classes of offenders, guilty before the passage of this act of
bigamy, polygamy, or unlawful cohabitation, on such conditions and
under such limitations as he shall think proper; but no such amnesty
shall have effect unless the conditions thereof shall be complied with.

"SEC. 7--That the issue of bigamous or polygamous marriages, known as
Mormon marriages, in cases in which such marriages have been solemnized
according to the ceremonies of the Mormon sect, in any territory of
the United States, and such issue shall have been born before the 1st
January, A.D. 1883, are hereby legitimated.

"SEC. 8--That no polygamist, bigamist, or any person cohabiting with
more than one woman, and no woman cohabiting with any of the persons
described as aforesaid in this section, in any territory or other place
over which the United States have exclusive jurisdiction, shall be
entitled to vote at any election held in any such territory or other
place, or be eligible for election or appointment to or be entitled
to hold any office or place of public trust, honour, or emolument in,
under, or for any such territory or place, or under the United States.

"SEC. 9--That all the registration and election offices of every
description in the Territory of Utah are hereby declared vacant, and
each and every duty relating to the registration of voters, the conduct
of elections, the receiving or rejection of votes, and the canvassing
and returning of the same, and the issuing of certificates or other
evidence of election in said territory, shall, until other provision be
made by the Legislative Assembly of said territory as is hereinafter
by this section provided, be performed under the existing laws of the
United States and of said territory by proper persons, who shall be
appointed to execute such offices and perform such duties by a board of
five persons, to be appointed by the President, by and with the advice
and consent of the Senate, not more than three of whom shall be members
of one political party, a majority of whom shall be a quorum. The
canvass and return of all the votes at elections in said territory for
members of the Legislative Assembly thereof shall also be returned to
said board, which shall canvass all such returns and issue certificates
of election to those persons who, being eligible for such election,
shall appear to have been lawfully elected, which certificates shall be
the only evidence of the right of such persons to sit in such Assembly,
provided said board of five persons shall not exclude any persons
otherwise eligible to vote from the polls, on account of any opinion
such person may entertain on the subject of bigamy or polygamy; nor
shall they refuse to count any such vote on account of the opinion of
the person casting it on the subject of bigamy or polygamy; but each
house of such Assembly, after its organization, shall have power to
decide upon the elections and qualifications of its members."

The day also on which I arrived in Salt Lake City was itself a
memorable one, for it was the closing day of the fifty second annual
conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints--notable,
beyond other conferences, as a public expression of the opinions of
the leaders of the Mormon Church, at a crisis of great importance. The
whole hierarchy of Utah took part in the proceedings, and it was fitly
closed by an address from President Taylor himself, evoking such a
demonstration of fervid and yet dignified enthusiasm as I have never
seen equalled.

My telegram to the New York World on that occasion may still stand as
my description of the scene.

"Acquainted though I am with displays of Oriental fanaticism and
Western revivalism, I set this Mormon enthusiasm on one side as being
altogether of a different character, for it not only astonishes by its
fervour, but commands respect by its sincere sobriety. The congregation
of the Saints assembled in the Tabernacle, numbering, by my own careful
computation, eleven thousand odd, and composed in almost exactly
equal parts of the two sexes, reminded me of the Puritan gatherings
of the past as I imagined them, and of my personal experiences of the
Transvaal Boers as I know them. There was no rant, no affectation, no
straining after theatrical effect. The very simplicity of this great
gathering of country-folk was striking in the extreme, and significant
from first to last of a power that should hardly be trifled with by
sentimental legislation. I have read, I can assert, everything of
importance that has ever been written about the Mormons, but a single
glance at these thousands of hardy men fresh from their work at the
plough--at the rough vehicles they had come in, ranged along the street
leading to the Tabernacle, at their horses, with the mud of the fields
still upon them--convinced me that I knew nothing whatever of this
interesting people. Of the advice given at this Conference it is easy
to speak briefly, for all counselled alike. In his opening address,
President Taylor said,--

"'The antagonism we now experience here has always existed, but we have
also come out of our troubles strengthened. I say to you, be calm, for
the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth, and He will take care of us.'

"Every succeeding speaker repeated the same advice, and the outcome
of the five days' Conference may therefore be said to have been an
exhortation to the Saints 'to pay no attention whatever to outside
matters, but to live their religion, leave the direction of affairs to
their priesthood, and the result in the hands of God.'

"Bishops Sharp and Cluff challenged the Union to show more conspicuous
examples of loyalty than those that 'brighten the records of Utah;'
Bishop Hatch referred to a 'Revolutionary' ancestry; and Apostle
Brigham Young (a son of the late President) alluded to the advocacy
in certain quarters of warlike measures with which he was not himself
in sympathy. 'I am not,' he said, 'altogether belligerent, and am not
advocating warlike measures, but I do want to advocate our standing
true and steadfast all the time. If I am to be persecuted for living my
religion, why, I am to be persecuted. That is all. Dodging the issue
will not change it. I have read the bill passed to injure us, but am
satisfied that everything will come out all right, that the designs of
our enemies will be frustrated, and confusion will come upon them.'
Apostle Woodruff reminded the enemies of the Church that it 'costs a
great deal to shed the blood of God's people;' and Apostle Lorenzo Snow
said,--'I do not have any fear or trouble about fiery ordeals, but if
any do come we should all be ready for them.'

"These and other references to possible trouble seem to show that the
leaders of the Church consider the state of the public mind such as
to make these allusions necessary. But loyalty to the Constitution
was the text of every address, and even as regards the Edmunds Bill
itself, Apostle Lorenzo Snow said,--'There is something good in it,
for it legalizes every issue from plural marriages up to January 1,
1883. No person a few years ago could have ever expected such an act
of Congress. But it has passed, and been signed by the President.' The
expressions of the speakers with regard to polygamy were at times very
explicit. The President yesterday said,--'Some of our kind friends have
suggested that we cast our wives off, but our feelings are averse to
that. We are bound to them for time and eternity--we have covenanted
before high heaven to remain bound to them. And I declare, in the name
of Israel's God, that we will keep the covenant, and I ask all to say
to this Amen.' (Here, like the sound of a great sea-wave breaking in a
cave, a vast Amen arose from the concourse.) 'We may have to shelter
behind a hedge while the storm is passing over, but let us be true
to ourselves, our wives, our families, and our God, and all will be
well.' Again to-day he exhorted the Saints 'to keep within the law, but
at the same time to live their religion and be true to their wives,
and the principles Of their Church.' Several other speakers touched
upon the fact of plurality being an integral doctrine of Mormonism,
and not to be interfered with without committing an outrage against
their religion. Retaliation was never suggested, unless the advice
given to the congregation to make all their purchases at Mormon shops
may be accepted as a tendency towards Boycotting. But the Church was
exhorted to stand firm, to allow persecution to run its course, and
above all, to be 'manly in their fidelity to their wives.' Nor could
anything exceed the impressiveness of the response which the people
gave instantaneously to the appeal of their President for the support
of their voices. The great Tabernacle was filled with waves of sound as
the 'Amens' of the congregation burst out. The shout of men going into
battle was not more stirring than the closing words of this memorable
conference spoken as if by one vast voice: 'Hosannah! for the Lord God
Omnipotent reigneth; He is with us now and will be for ever. Amen!'"



CHAPTER VI.

LEGISLATION AGAINST PLURALITY.

    A people under a ban--What the Mormon men think of the
    Anti-Polygamy Bill--And what the Mormon women say of
    polygamy--Puzzling confidences--Practical plurality a very dull
    affair--But theoretically a hedge-hog problem--Matrimonial
    eccentricities--The fashionable milliner fatal to
    plurality--Absurdity of comparing Moslem polygamy with Mormon
    plurality--Are the women of Utah happy?--Their enthusiasm for
    Women's Rights.

UTAH, therefore, at the time of my visit was "a proclaimed
district"--to use the Anglo-Indian phrase for tracts suspected of
infanticide--and every Mormon within it had a share in the disgrace
thrust upon it. Nor was the triumph of the Gentile concealed at the
result. The Mormons, therefore, were consolidated, in the first
instance, by the equal pressure of the new law upon all sections of the
church alike; in the next by the openly expressed exultation of the
Gentiles. I wrote at the time: "They feel that they are under a common
ban. The children have read the Bill or have had its purport explained
to them, and it is well known even among the Gentiles how keen the
grief was in every household when the news that the Bill had passed
reached Utah. Wives still shed bitter tears over the act of Congress
which breaks up their happy homes, and robs them and their children of
the protecting presence of a husband and father. The Bill was aimed to
put a stop to a supposed self-indulgence of the men. But the Mormons
have never thought of it in this light at all. They see in it only an
attempt to punish their wives. And it is this alleged cruelty to their
wives and children that has stubborned the Mormon men."

Meanwhile the Mormons' affect a contemptuous disregard Of the
Commission and all its works. I have spoken to many, some of them
leaders of local opinion, and everywhere I find the same amused
indifference to it expressed. "We have too many real troubles," they
say, "to go manufacturing imaginary ones. We must live our religion in
the present and leave the future to God."

"But," I would say, "this is not a question of the future. All children
born after the 1st of January, 1883, will be illegitimate--and in these
matters Nature is generally very punctual. Now, are you going to break
the law or going to keep it?"

Some would answer "neither," and some "both," but all would agree
that there was no necessity for worrying themselves about evils which
may never befall, and that the Edmunds Bill, with all its malignity
and cunning, was "a stupid blunder," an "impossible" enactment, "an
absurdity." So the questioning would probably end in laughter.

"But in spite of this expressed indifference to the working of the
Bill, there can be little doubt that the more responsible Mormons
have already made up their minds as to the course they will take.
'The people' will follow them of course, and forecasting the future,
therefore, I anticipate that a small minority will break down under the
pressure, and will return their plural wives to their parents, with
such provision as they can make for their future support.

"Of the remainder, that is to say the bulk of the Mormons, I believe,
indeed I feel convinced, that they will simply ignore the Bill so long
as it ignores them, and that when it is put in force against them, they
will accept the penalty without complaint. In some cases the onus of
proving guilt will no doubt be made heavier by 'passive resistance,'
and where the whole family is solid in throwing obstacles in the way
of espionage, conviction will necessarily be very difficult. As a case
in point may be cited the instance of the Mormon in Salt Lake City,
who married a second wife and successfully defied both the law and
the public to fix his relationship to the lady in question and her
children. She herself was content with saying that her children were
honourable in birth, and that the wedding-ring on her finger was a fact
and not a fiction. But who her husband was neither the law nor the
press could find out for two years, and only then by the confession of
the sinner himself."

I was sitting one day with two Mormon ladies, plural wives, and the
conversation turned upon marriage.

"But," said I, "now that you have experienced the disadvantages of
plurality, shall you advise your daughters to follow your example?"

"No," said both promptly, "I shall not advise them one way or the
other. They must make their own choice, just as I did."

"Choice, I am afraid, is hardly a choice though. Plurality, I fear, is
too nearly a religious duty to leave much option with girls."

"Nonsense," said the elder of the two, "I was just as free to choose my
husband as you were to choose your wife. I married for love."

"And do you really believe," broke in the other, "that any woman in
the world would marry a man she did not like from a sense of religious
duty!"

"Yes," said I, regardless of the fair speaker's scorn, "I thought
plenty of women had done so. More than that, thousands have renounced
marriage with men whom they loved and taken the veil, for Heaven's
sake."

"Very true," was the reply, "a woman may renounce marriage and become a
nun as a religious duty. But the same motive would never have persuaded
that woman to marry against her inclinations. There is all the
difference in the world between the two. Any woman will tell you that."

"Then you mean to say," I persisted, "that you and your friends
consider that you are voluntary agents when you go into plurality? that
you do so entirely of your own accord and of your own free choice?"

"Certainly I do," was the reply. "You may not believe us, of course,
but that I cannot help. All I can say to you is, that if I had the last
seven years of my life to live over again, I should do exactly what I
did seven years ago."

"And what was that?" I asked.

"Refuse to marry a Gentile, to please my friends, and marry a
polygamist to please myself. I had two offers from unmarried men,
either of which my family were very anxious I should accept. But I did
not care for either. But when my husband, who had already two wives,
proposed to me, I accepted him, in spite of my friends' protests. And I
would marry him again if the choice came over again."

"Then yours must surely be exceptional cases, for I cannot bring myself
to believe that those who have been 'first' wives would ever consent to
their husband's re-marriage, if their past could be recalled."

"But I was his first wife," said the elder lady, "and my husband's
second wife was his first love. And if my past were recalled as you
put it, I would give my consent just as willingly as I did twelve
years ago." "Perhaps," said she, laughing, "you will call mine an
'exceptional' case too. But if you go through the Mormons individually,
I am afraid you will find that the 'exceptional' cases are very large."

"And how about the minority?" I asked, "the wives whose hearts have
been broken by plurality?"

"Well," was the reply, "there are plenty of unhappy wives. But this
is surely not peculiar to polygamy, is it? There are plenty of women
who find they have made a mistake. But is it not the same in monogamy?
And yet, though our poor women can get divorces with no trouble, and
at an expense of only ten dollars, and are certain of a competence
after divorce, and of re-marriage if they choose, they do not do it.
There is no greater disgrace attaching to divorce here than in Europe.
Indeed allowances are made for the special trials of plurality, and
mere unhappiness is in itself quite sufficient for a woman to get a
divorce. Yet divorce is very rare indeed, not one-tenth as common as in
Massachusetts, for instance."

"There are bad men amongst us just as there are everywhere," continued
the other lady, "and a bad Mormon is the worst man there can be. But we
are not the only people that have bad husbands among them."

And so it went on. I was met at every point by assurances as sincere
as tone of voice and language could make them appear. Eventually I
scrambled out of the subject as best I could, covering my retreat with
the remark,--

"Well, my only justification in saying that I do not believe you, is
this, that if I said I did, no one would believe me."

Of this much, however, I am convinced, that whatever may have been
true thirty years ago--and there has not been a single trustworthy
book written about Mormonism since 1862--it is not true to-day that
the Church interferes with the domestic relations of the people. When
there is a divorce the Church takes care that the man does not turn his
wife adrift without provision. But as far as I have been able to learn,
the authorities do not meddle in any other way between man and woman,
so long, of course, as neither is a scandal to the community. When a
scandal arises the Church takes prompt notice of it, and the offender,
if incorrigible, is next heard of as "apostatizing," or, in other
words, being turned out of Mormonism as unfit to live in it. But once
married into polygamy, religion is all-powerful in reconciling women
to the sacrifices they have to make, precisely, I suppose, in the same
way that religion reconciles the nun to the sacrifices which her Church
accepts from her.

Practical Plurality, then, is a very dull affair. I was disappointed
in it. I had expected to see men with long whips, sitting on fences,
swearing at their gangs of wives at work in the fields. I expected
every now and then to hear of drunken saints beating seven or eight
wives all at once, and perhaps even to have seen the unusual spectacle
of a house full of women and children rushing screaming into the street
with one intoxicated husband and father in pursuit. Everywhere else
in the world wife-beating is a pastime more or less indulged in coram
publico. In London, at any rate, men so arrange their chastisements
that you can hear the screams from the street and see the wife run out
of the front door on to the pavement. In Salt Lake City therefore, it
seemed only reasonable to suppose that the amount of the screaming
would be in proportion to the number of the wives, and that eventually
ill-used families would be seen pouring simultaneously out of several
doors, and scattering over the premises with hideous ululation. Where
are the aged apostles who have so often been described as going about
in their swallow-tail coats courting each other's daughters? Where
are the "girl-hunting elders" and "ogling bishops"? Where are the
families of one man and ten wives to be found taking the air together
that pictures have so often shown us? Of course there are anomalies,
and very objectionable they are. Thus one young man has married his
half-aunt, another his half-sister, and three sisters have wedded the
same man; but these instances are all "historical," so to speak, and
have been so often trotted out by anti-Mormon book-makers, that they
are hardly worth repeating. Nor does it appear to me to be of any force
to begin raking to-day into the old suspicions as to what Mormons dead
and gone used to do.

What is polygamy like to-day? That is the question. Polygamy to-day,
then, has settled down into the most matter-of-fact system that is
possible for such exceptional domestic arrangements. In the first
place, it is not compulsory, and some of the leading saints are
monogamous. About one-fourth of married Mormons are polygamous, and of
these something less than three per cent are under forty years of age.
The bill of 1862 making polygamy penal effected little or no difference
in the annual average of plural marriages, but since 1877 there has
been a very sensible decrease.

These facts, then, seem to prove first that polygamy, though accepted
as a doctrine of the Church, is not generally acted upon--and why?
For the best of reasons. Either that the men cannot afford to keep
up more than one establishment, or that they are too happy with one
wife to care to marry a second, or that the first wife refuses to
allow any increase of the household--all of which reasons show that
polygamy is controlled by prudential and domestic considerations, and
is not the indiscriminate "debauchery" that so many of the public
believe it to be. It is also evident that the younger Mormons are not
so active in marrying as the elder men were at their age, for ten
years ago the proportion of polygamous Mormons under forty years of
age was much greater, which may mean that the inaction of Congress was
gradually working towards the end which the action of '62 thwarted.
By legislating against polygamy, plural marriages increased--1863
to 1866 being as busy years in the Endowment House as any that ever
preceded them--while by letting polygamy severely alone they have been
decreasing.

Polygamy in fact, by the relaxation of the regime, now that Brigham
Young's personal government has ceased, has taken its place as an
ordinary civil institution, entailing serious responsibilities upon
those who choose to enter into it, and not carrying with it such
promises of temporal advantage as at one time were reserved for the
plurally wedded. There is not the same enthusiasm about it that there
was, owing probably to the diffusion among the people of a better
sense of the position of women and of the opinions of the world with
regard to polygamy. Under the administration of President Taylor there
has been a marked disinclination in the Church to interfere with the
domestic relations of the community, except, as I have said before,
when reprimand or punishment seemed to be called for; and it is
reasonable therefore to argue that the material decline in the number
of plural marriages between 1878 and 1882 would have continued, the
proportion of young enthusiasts have gone on decreasing and, as the
elders died out, the total of polygamists become annually less. Such, I
would contend, is the reasonable inference from the facts I have given.

Polygamy, as a problem, reminds me of a hedgehog. But as the hedgehog
may not be familiar to my American readers, let me explain. The
hedgehog, then, is a small animal with a very elastic skin, closely
set all over with strong sharp spines. A rural life is all its
joy. In habits and character it assimilates somewhat to the Mormon
peasant, being inoffensive, useful, industrious, prolific, and largely
frugivorous. But when hunted it is otherwise. For the hedgehog, if
closely pursued, takes hold of its ears with its hind paws and, tucking
its nose into the middle of its stomach, rolls itself into a perfect
ball. The spines then stand out straight and in every direction
equally. Nor, thus defended, does the hedgehog shun the public eye.
On the contrary, it lies out in the full sunlight, in the middle of
the sidewalk or the dusty high-road, a challenge to the inquisitive
attention of every passing dog. And you can no more keep a dog from
going out of its way to reconnoitre the queer-looking object than you
can keep needles away from loadstones. They do not all behave in the
same way to it, though. The mutton-headed dogs sit down by it and
contemplate it vacantly, and go away after a bit in a kind of brown
study. The silly ones smell it too close, and go off down the road in a
streak of dust and yelp. The experienced dogs sniff at it and trot on.
"Only that hedgehog again!" they say. The malicious prick their noses
and lose their temper, and then prick their noses worse and lose their
tempers more. The puppy barks at it remotely, receding every time by
the recoil of its own bark, till it barks itself backwards into the
opposite ditch. But the hedgehog lies perfectly still, as round and
as spiny as ever, in the middle of the high-road. All the dogs are
much the same to it. Some roll it a little one way, and some roll it a
little the other. It gets dusty or it gets wet. But there it lies as
inscrutable, puzzling, and odious to passing dogs as ever. By-and-by
when it is dark, and everybody has got tired of poking it and sniffing
it and wondering at it, the hedgehog will quietly unroll itself and
creep away to some secluded spot betwixt orchard and corn-field, and
remote from the highways of men and their dogs.

I am particularly led to this moralizing because a Mormon has just been
enumerating, at my request, some of the more extraordinary anomalies
that he knows of in recent polygamy. I took notes of a few, and they
seem to me sufficiently puzzling to justify a place in these pages.

A young and very pretty girl, in "the upper ten" of Mormonism, married
a young man of her own class, but stipulated before marriage that he
should marry a second wife as soon as he could afford to do so.

A young couple were engaged, but quarrelled, and the lover out of pique
married another lady. Two years later his first love, having refused
other offers in the mean time, married him as his second wife.

A man having married a second wife to please himself, married a third
to please his first. "She was getting old, she said, and wanted a
younger woman to help her about the house."

A couple about to be married made an agreement between themselves that
the husband should not marry again unless it was one of the relatives
of the first wife. The ladies selected have refused, and the husband
remains true to his promise.

The belle of the settlement, a Gentile, refused monogamist offers of
marriage, and married a Mormon who had two wives already.

A girl, distracted between her love for her suitor and her love for her
mother, compromised in her affections by stipulating that he should
marry both her mother and herself, which he did.

A girl, a Gentile, bitterly opposed at first to polygamy, married a
polygamist at the solicitation of his first wife, her great friend.

Two girls were great friends, and one of them, getting engaged to a man
(by no means of prepossessing appearance), persuaded her friend to get
engaged to him too, and he married them both on the same day.

These are enough. Moreover, they are not isolated cases, and I believe
I am right in saying that I can give a second instance, of recent
date, of nearly all of them. Nor are these anonymous fictions like the
"victims" of anti-Mormon writers. I have names for each of them. One of
them tells me she could name "scores" of the same kind.

It appears to me, therefore, that the women of Utah have shaken
somewhat the modern theories of the conjugal relation, and--with all
one's innate aversion to a system which is capable of such odious
abnormalisms--a most interesting and baffling problem for study. It is,
as I said, a regular hedgehog of a problem. If you could only catch
hold of it by the nose or the tail, you could scrunch it up easily. But
it has spines all over. It is at once provocative and unapproachable.

I remember once in India giving a tame monkey a lump of sugar inside
a corked bottle. The monkey was of an inquiring kind, and it nearly
killed it. Sometimes, in an impulse of disgust, it would throw the
bottle away, out of its own reach, and then be distracted till it was
given back to it. At others it would sit with a countenance of the
most intense dejection, contemplating the bottled sugar, and then,
as if pulling itself together for another effort at solution, would
sternly take up the problem afresh, and gaze into it. It would tilt
it up one way and try to drink the sugar through the cork, and then,
suddenly reversing it, try to catch it as it fell out at the bottom.
Under the impression that it could capture it by a surprise it kept
rapping its teeth against the glass in futile bites, and, warming to
the pursuit of the revolving lump, used to tie itself into regular
knots round the bottle. Fits of the most ludicrous melancholy would
alternate with these spasms of furious speculation, and how the matter
would have ended it is impossible to say. But the monkey one night got
loose and took the bottle with it. And it has always been a delight to
me to think that whole forestfuls of monkeys have by this time puzzled
themselves into fits over the great Problem of Bottled Sugar. What
profound theories those long-tailed philosophers must have evolved!
What polemical acrimony that bottle must have provoked! And what a
Confucius the original monkey must have become! A single morning with
such a Sanhedrim discussing such a matter would surely have satiated
even a Swift with satire.

Taking then polygamy to be the bottle, and the Gentile to be the
monkey, it appears to me that the only alternatives in solution are
these: Either smash the whole thing up altogether, or else fall back
upon that easy-going old doctrine of wise men, that "morality" is after
all a matter of mere geography.

An Oriental legend shows us Allah sitting in casual conversation with a
man. A cockroach comes along, and Allah stamps on it. "What did you do
that for?" asks the human, looking at the ruined insect. "Because I am
God Almighty," was the reply.

Now, polygamy can be smashed flat if the States choose to show their
power to do so. But no man who takes a part in that demolition must
suppose that in so doing he will be accepted by the community as
rescuing them from degradation. If left alone, polygamy will die out.
Mormons deny this, but I feel sure that they know they are wrong when
they deny it, for nothing but a perpetual miracle of loaves and fishes
will make polygamy and families of forty possible when population and
food-supply come to talk the position over seriously between them. The
expense of plurality will before long prohibit plurality.

"The fashionable milliner" is the most formidable adversary that the
system has yet encountered. A twenty-dollar bonnet is a staggering
argument against it. When women were contented with sunshades, and
made them for themselves, the husband of many wives could afford to be
lavish, and to indulge his household in a diversity of headgear. But
that old serpent, the fashionable milliner, has got over the garden
wall, and Lilith [1] and Eve are no longer content with primitive
garments of home manufacture.

No. Polygamy will before long be impossible, except to the rich; and in
an agricultural community, restricted in area, and further restricted
by the scarcity of water, there can never be many rich men. As it is,
the cost of plurality was on several occasions referred to by Mormons
whom I met during my tour, and I know one man who has for three years
postponed his second marriage, as he does not consider that his
means justify it; while I fancy it will not be disputed by any one
who has inquired into polygamy that, as a general rule, prudential
considerations control the system. Polygamy, then, I sincerely believe,
carries its own antidote with it, and if left alone will rapidly cure
itself. In the mean time the community that practises it does not
consider itself "degraded," and those who take part in smashing it up
must not think it does.

The Mormons are a peasant people, with many of the faults of peasant
life, but with many of the best human virtues as well. They are
conspicuously industrious, honest, and sober.

There is, of course, nothing whatever in common between Oriental
polygamy and Mormon plurality. The main object, and the main result
of the two systems are so widely diverse, that it is hardly necessary
even to refer to the hundred other points of difference which make
comparison between the two utterly absurd.

Yet the comparison is often made in order to prove the Mormons
"degraded," and it is a great pity that such superficial and stupid
arguments should be far more effective ones are at hand. Polygamy,
though difficult to handle, is very vulnerable. The hedgehog, after
all, will have to unroll some time or another. But to assault polygamy
because the Mormons are "Turks" or "debauched Mahometans," or the other
things which silly people call them, is monstrous.

The women have complicated the problem by multiplying instances of
eccentric "affection." But with it all they persist in believing that
they have retained a most exalted estimate of womanly honour. The men,
again, have inextricably entangled all recognized ideas of matrimonial
responsibilities. Yet they have not lost any of the manliness which
characterizes the pioneers of the West.

Their social anomalies are deplorable, but they are not desperate.
Education and the influx of outsiders must infallibly do their work,
and any attempt to rob these men and women of the fruits of their
astonishing industry and of the peaceful enjoyment of the soil which
they have conquered for the United States from the most warlike tribes
among the Indians, and from the most malignant type of desert, is not
only not statesmanship, but it is not humanity.

Are the women of Utah happy? No; not in the monogamous acceptation
of the word "happy." In polygamy the highest happiness of woman is
contentment. But on the other hand her greatest unhappiness is only
discontent. She has not the opportunity on the one hand of rising to
the raptures of perfect love. On the other, she is spared the bitter,
killing anguish of "jealousy" and of infidelity.

But contentment is not happiness. It is its negative, and often has
its source in mere resignation to sorrow. It is the lame sister of
happiness, the deaf-mute in the family of joy. It lives neither in
the background nor foreground of enjoyment, but always in the middle
distance. Tender in all things, it never becomes real happiness by
concentration; having to fill no deep heart-pools, it trickles over
vast surfaces. It goes through life smiling but seldom laughing.
Now, in many philosophies we are taught that this same contentment
is the perfect form of happiness. But humanity is always at war
with philosophy. And I for one will never believe that perpetual
placidity is the highest experience of natures which are capable of
suffering the raptures of joy and of grief. I had rather live humanly,
travelling alternately over sunlit hills and gloomy valleys, than
exist philosophically on the level prairies of monotonous contentment.
Holding, then, the opinion that it is a nobler life to have sounded the
deeps and measured the heights of human emotions than to have floated
in shallows continually, I contend that polygamy is wrong in itself and
a cardinal crime against the possibilities of a woman's heart. A plural
wife can never know the utmost happiness possible for a woman. They
confess this. And by this confession the practice stands damned.

Physically, Mormon plurality appears to me to promise much of the
success which Plato dreamed of, and Utah about the best nursery for
his soldiers that he could have found. Look at the urchins that go
clattering about the roads, perched two together on the bare backs of
horses, and only a bit of rope by way of bridle. Look at the rosy,
demure little girls that will be their wives some day. Take note of
their fathers' daily lives, healthy outdoor work. Go into their homes
and see the mothers at their work. For in Utah servants get sometimes
as much as six dollars a week (and their board and lodging as well
of course), and most households therefore go without this expensive
luxury. And then as you walk home through one of their rural towns
along the tree-shaded streets, with water purling along beside you
as you walk, and the clear breeze from the hills blowing the perfume
of flowers across your path in gusts, with the cottage homes, half
smothered in blossoming fruit-trees, on either hand, and a perpetual
succession gardens,--then I say, come back and sit down, if you can, to
call this people "licentious," "impure," "degraded."

The Mormons themselves refuse to believe that polygamy is the real
objection against them, and it will be found impossible to convince
them that the Edmunds bill is really what it purports to be, a crusade
against their domestic arrangements only. There are some among them who
thoroughly understand the "political" aspect of the case, and are aware
that "the reorganization of Utah" would give very enviable pickings to
the friends of the Commission. Others, have made up their minds that
behind this generous anti-polygamy sentiment is mean sectarian envy,
and that this is only one more of those amiable efforts of narrow
Christians to crush a detested and flourishing sect.

Jealousy, in fact, is the Mormons' explanation of the Edmunds bill. The
Gentiles, they say, are hankering after the good things of Utah, and
hope by one cry after another to persecute the Mormons out of them. But
it is far more curious that the jealousy of their own sex should be
suggested by Mormon women as the cause of their participation in the
clamour against polygamy. Yet so it is; the Gentile women are, they
say, "jealous" of a community where every woman has a husband! It is a
perplexing suggestion, and so thoroughly reverses all rational course
of argument, that I wish it had never been seriously put forward.
Imagine the ladies of the Eastern States who have made themselves
conspicuous in this campaign, who have fought and bled to rescue their
poor sisters from slavery, to free them from the grasp of Mormon
Bluebeards--imagine, I say, these ladies being told by the sisters for
whom they are fighting, that they ought to be ashamed of themselves for
being envious of the women in polygamy! Instead of being thanked for
helping to strike the fetters of plurality off their suffering sisters,
they are met with the retort that they ought to try being wives and
mothers themselves before they come worrying those who have tried it
and are content! They are requested not to meddle with "what they
don't understand," and are threatened with a counter-crusade against
the polyandry of Washington, New York, and other cities! But even more
staggering is the fact that Mormon women base their indignation against
their persecuting saviours on woman's rights, the very ground upon
which those saviours have based their crusade! The advocates of woman's
rights are a very strong party in Utah; and their publications use the
very same arguments that strong-minded women have made so terrible
to newspaper editors in Europe, and members of Parliament. Thus the
Woman's Exponent--with "The Rights of the Women of All Nations" for
its motto--publishes continually signed letters in which plural wives
affirm their contentment with their lot, and in one of its issues is a
leading article, headed "True Charity," and signed Mary Ellen Kimball,
in which the women of Mormondom are reminded that they ought to pray
for poor benighted Mr. Edmunds and all who think like him! Then follows
a letter from a Gentile, addressed to "the truthful pure-hearted,
intelligent, Christian women" of Utah, and after this an article,
"Hints on Marriage," signed "Lillie Freeze." But for a sentence or two
it might be an article by a Gentile in a Gentile "lady's paper," for it
speaks of "courtship" and "lovers," and has the quotation, "two souls
with but a single thought, two hearts that beat as one," and all the
other orthodox pretty things about true love and married bliss. Yet the
writer is speaking of polygamy! In the middle of this article written
"for love's sweet sake," and as womanly and pure as ever words written
by woman, comes this paragraph:--

"In proportion as the power of evil increases, a disregard for the
sacred institution of marriage also increases among the youth, and
contempt for the marriage obligation increases among the married until
this most sacred relationship will be overwhelmed by disunion and
strife, and only among the despised Latter-Day Saints will the true
foundation of social happiness and prosperity be found upon the earth;
but in order to realize this state we must be guided by principles
more perfect than those which have wrought such dissolution. God has
revealed a plan for establishing a new order of society which will
elevate and benefit all mankind who embrace it. The nations that fight
against it are working out their own destruction, for their house
is built upon the sand, and one of the corner-stones in the doomed
structure is already loosened through their disregard and dishonour of
the institution of marriage."

Now what is to be done with women who not only declare they are happy
in polygamy, but persist in trying to improve their monogamous sisters?
How is the missionary going to begin, for instance, with Lillie Freeze?

If the Commission deals leniently with them, they will offer only
a passive resistance to the law. But if there is any appearance of
outrage, General Sherman may have some work to do, and it will be
work more worthy of disciplined troops than mere Indian fighting.
There would be abundance of that too, but the Mormons are themselves
sufficient to test the calibre of any troops in the world. For they are
orderly, solid in their adherence to the Church, and trained during
their youth and early manhood to a rough, mountain-frontier life.
They are in fact very superior "Boers," and Utah is a very superior
Transvaal, strategically. Mormonism is not the wind-and-rain inflated
pumpkin the world at a distance believes; it is good firm pumpkin to
the very core. Nor are the Indians a picturesque fiction. They are an
ugly reality, and under proper guidance a very formidable one. In the
mean time there is no talk of war, and the Sword of Laban is lying
quietly in its sheath. For one thing, the commission has given no
"cause" for war; for another, the present hierarchy of the Church are
men of peace.

Such, then, as I view it, is the position in Utah at the present time.
Mormonism has taken up, in the phrase of diplomatic history, "an
attitude of observation," and the future is "in the hands of the Lord
God of Israel."

Footnotes:

1. By the way, it is curious that it should be charged against the
Mormons that they have made Adam a polygamist. It is not a Mormon
invention at all. For, as is well known, legends far older than Moses'
writings declare that Eve married into plurality, and that Lilith was
the "first wife" of our great progenitor.



CHAPTER VII.

SUA SI BONA NORINT.

    A Special Correspondent's lot--Hypothecated wits--The Daughters
    of Zion--Their modest demeanour--Under the banner of Woman's
    Rights--The discoverer discovered--Turning the tables--"By Jove,
    sir, you shall have mustard with your beefsteak!"

IT has been my good fortune to see many countries, and my ill-luck
to have had to maintain, during all my travels, an appearance of
intelligence. Though I have been over much of Europe, over all of
India and its adjoining countries, Afghanistan, Beloochistan, Burmah,
and Ceylon, in the north and west and south of Africa, and in various
out-of-the-way islands in miscellaneous oceans, I have never visited
one of them purely "for pleasure." I have always been "representing"
other people. My eyes and ears have been hypothecated, so to speak--my
intelligence been in pledge. When I was sent out to watch wars, there
was a tacit agreement that I should be shot at, so that I might let
other people know what it felt like. When run away with by a camel
in a desert that had no "other end" to it, I accepted my position
simply as material for a letter for which my employers had duly paid.
They tried to drown me in a mill-stream; that was a good half-column.
Two Afridis sat down by me when I had sprained my knee by my horse
falling, and waited for me to faint that they might cut my throat.
But they overdid it, for they looked so like vultures that I couldn't
faint. But it made several very harrowing paragraphs. I have been sent
to sea to get into cyclones in the Bay of Biscay, and hurricanes in
the Mozambique Channel, that I might describe lucidly the sea-going
properties of the vessels under test. I have been sent to a King to ask
him for information that it was known beforehand he would not give, and
commissioned to follow Irish agitators all over Ireland, in the hope
that I might be able to say more about them than they knew themselves.
It has been my duty to walk about inquisitively after Zulus, and to
run away judiciously with Zulus after me. Sometimes I have taken long
shots at Afghans, and sometimes they have taken short ones at me. In
short, I have been deputed at one time and another to do many things
which I should never have done "for pleasure," and many which, for
pleasure, I should like to do again. But wherever I have been sent I
have had to go about, seeing as much as I could and asking about all I
couldn't see, and have become, professionally, accustomed to collecting
evidence, sifting it on the spot, and forming my own conclusions. In a
way, therefore, a Special Correspondent becomes of necessity an expert
at getting at facts. He finds that everything he is commissioned to
investigate has at least two sides to it, and that many things have
two right sides. There are plenty of people always willing to mislead
him, and he has to pick and choose. He arrives unprejudiced, and speaks
according to the knowledge he acquires. Sometimes he is brought up to
the hill with a definite commission to curse, but like Balaam, the son
of Barak, he begins blessing; or he is sent out to bless, and falls
to cursing. Until he arrives on the spot it is impossible for him to
say which he will do. But, whatever he does, the Special Correspondent
writes with the responsibility of a large public. It is impossible to
write flippantly with all the world for critics.

Now, the demeanour of women in Utah, as compared with say Brighton or
Washington, is modesty itself, and the children are just such healthy,
pretty, vigorous children as one sees in the country, or by the seaside
in England--and, in my opinion, nowhere else. Utah-born girls, the
offspring of plural wives, have figures that would make Paris envious,
and they carry themselves with almost Oriental dignity. But remember,
Salt Lake City is a city of rustics. They do not affect "gentility,"
and are careful to explain at every opportunity that the stranger must
not be shocked at their homely ways and speech. There is an easiness of
manner therefore which is unconventional, but it is only a blockhead
who could mistake this natural gaiety of the country for anything
other than it is. There is nothing, then, so far as I have seen, in
the manners of Salt Lake City to make me suspect the existence of that
"licentiousness" of which so much has been written; but there is a
great deal on the contrary to convince me of a perfectly exceptional
reserve and self-respect. I know, too, from medical assurance,
that Utah has also the practical argument of healthy nurseries to
oppose to the theories of those who attack its domestic relations on
physiological grounds.

But the "Woman's Rights" aspect of polygamy is one that has never been
theorized at all. It deserves, however, special consideration by those
who think that they are "elevating" Mormon women by trying to suppress
polygamy. It possesses also a general interest for all. For the plural
wives of Salt Lake City are not by any means "waiting for salvation"
at the hands of the men and women of the East. Unconscious of having
fetters on, they evince no enthusiasm for their noisy deliverers.

On the contrary, they consider their interference as a slur upon their
own intelligence, and an encroachment upon those very rights about
which monogamist females are making so much clamour. They look upon
themselves as the leaders in the movement for the emancipation of their
sex, and how, then, can they be expected to accept emancipation at the
hands of those whom they are trying to elevate? Thinking themselves
in the van of freedom, are they to be grateful for the guidance of
stragglers in the rear? They laugh at such sympathy, just as the brave
man might laugh at encouragement from a coward, or wealthy landowners
at a pauper's exposition of the responsibilities of property. Can the
deaf, they ask, tell musicians anything of the beauty of sounds, or
need the artist care for the blind man's theory of colour?

Indeed, it has been in contemplation to evangelize the Eastern
States, on this very subject of Woman's Rights! To send out from
Utah exponents of the proper place of woman in society, and to teach
the women of monogamy their duties to themselves and to each other!
"Woman's true status"--I am quoting from their organ--"is that of
true status companion to man, but so protected by law that she can
act in an independent sphere if he abuse his position, and render
union unendurable." They not only, therefore, claim all that women
elsewhere claim, but they consider marriage the universal birthright
of every female. First of all, they say, be married, and then in case
of accidents have all other "rights" as well. But to start with, every
woman must have a husband. She is hardly worth calling a woman if she
is single. Other privileges ought to be hers lest marriage should
prove disastrous. But in the first instance she should claim her right
to be a wife. And everybody else should insist on that claim being
recognized. The rest is very important to fall back upon, but union
with man is her first step towards her proper sphere.

Now, could any position be imagined more ludicrous for the would-be
saviours of Utah womanhood than this, that the slaves whom they talk
of rescuing from their degradation should be striving to bring others
up to their own standard? When Stanley was in Central Africa, he was
often amused and sometimes not a little disgusted to find that instead
of his discovering the Central Africans, the Central Africans insisted
on "discovering" him. Though he went into villages in order to take
notes of the savages, and to look at their belongings, the savages used
to turn the tables on him by discussing him, and taking his clothes
off to examine the curious colour, as they thought it, of his skin. So
that what with shaking off his explorers, and hunting up the various
articles they had abstracted for their unscientific scrutiny, his time
used to be thoroughly wasted, and he used to come away crestfallen,
and with the humiliating consciousness that it was the savages and not
he that had gained information and been "improved" by his visit. They
had "discovered" Stanley, not Stanley them. Something very like this
will be the fate of those who come to Utah thinking that they will be
received as shining lights from a better world. They will not find
the women of Utah waiting with outstretched arms to grasp the hand
that saves them. There will be no stampede of down-trodden females.
On the contrary, the clarion of woman's rights will be sounded, and
the intruding "champions" of that cause will find themselves attacked
with their own weapons, and hoisted with their own petards. 'With
the sceptre of woman's rights the daughters of Zion will go down as
apostles to evangelize the nation. 'Who is she that looketh forth as
the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an
army with banners?' The Daughter of Zion!"

Mormon wives, then, are emphatically "woman's-rights women," a title
which is everywhere recognized as indicating independence of character
and an elevated sense of the claims of the sex, and as inferring
exceptional freedom in action. And I venture to hold the opinion that
it is only women who are conscious of freedom that can institute such
movements as this in Utah, and only those who are enthusiastic in
the cause, that can carry them on with the courage and industry so
conspicuous in this community.

A Governor once went there specially instructed to release the women
of Utah from their bondage, but he found none willing to be released!
The franchise was then clamoured for in order to let the women of Utah
"fight their oppressors at the polls," and the Mormon "tyrants" took
the hint to give their wives votes, and the first use these misguided
victims of plurality made of their new possession was to protest,
20,000 victims together, against the calumnies heaped upon the men of
Utah "whom they honoured and loved." To-day it is an act of Congress
that is to set free these worse-than-Indian-suttee-devotees, and
whether they like it or not they are to be compelled to leave their
husbands or take the alternative of sending their husbands to jail.

It reminds me of the story, "Sir, you shall have mustard with your
beefsteak." A man sitting in a restaurant saw his neighbour eating
his steak without mustard, and pushed the pot across to him. The
stranger bowed his acknowledgment of the courtesy and went on eating,
but without any mustard. But the other man's sense of propriety was
outraged. "Beefsteak without mustard--monstrous," said he to himself;
and again he pushed the condiment towards the stranger. "Thank you,
sir," said the stranger, but without taking any, continued his meal as
he preferred it, without mustard. But his well-wisher could not stand
it any longer. He waited for a minute to see if the man would eat his
beef in the orthodox manner, and then, his sense of the fitness of
things overpowering him, he seized the mustard-pot and dabbing down a
great splash of mustard on to the stranger's plate, burst out with, "By
Jove, sir, you shall have mustard with your beefsteak!"

In the same way the monogamist reformers, having twice failed to
persuade the wives of Utah to abandon their husbands by giving them
facilities for doing so, are now going to take their husbands from
them by the force of the law. "Sua si bona norint" is the excuse of
the reformers to themselves for their philanthropy, and, like the old
Inquisitors who burnt their victims to save them from heresy, they
are going to make women wretched in order to make them happy. Says
the Woman's Exponent: "If the women of Utah are slaves, their bonds
are loving ones and dearly prized. They are to-day in the free and
unrestricted exercise of more political and social rights than are the
women of any other part of these United States. But they do not choose
as a body to court the follies and vices which adorn the civilization
of other cities, nor to barter principles of tried worth for the tinsel
of sentimentality or the gratification of passion."

It is of no use for "Mormon-eaters" to say that this is written "under
direction," and that the women who write in this way are prompted by
authority. Nor would they say it if they knew personally the women who
write thus.

Moreover, Mormon-eaters are perpetually denouncing the "scandalous
freedom" and "independence" extended to Mormon women and girls. And the
two charges of excessive freedom and abject slavery seem to me totally
incompatible.

I myself as a traveller can vouch for this: that one of my first
impressions of Salt Lake City was this, that there was a thoroughly
unconventional absence of restraint; just such freedom as one is
familiar with in country neighbourhoods, where "every one knows every
one else," and where the formalities of town etiquette are by general
consent laid aside. And this also I can sincerely say: that I never
ceased to be struck by the modest decorum of the women I meet out of
doors. After all, self-respect is the true basis of woman's rights.

This aspect of the polygamy problem deserves, then, I think,
considerable attention. An Act has been passed to compel some 20,000
women to leave their husbands, and the world looks upon these women
as slaves about to be freed from tyrants. Yet they have said and
done all that could possibly be expected of them, and even more than
could have been expected, to assure the world that they have neither
need nor desire for emancipation, as they honour their husbands,
and prefer polygamy, with all its conditions, to the monogamy which
brings with it infidelity at home and prostitution abroad. Again and
again they have protested, in petitions to individuals and petitions
to Congress, that "their bonds are loving ones and dearly prized."
But the enthusiasm of reformers takes no heed of their protests. They
are constantly declaring in public speeches and by public votes, in
books and in newspapers--above all, in their daily conduct--that they
consider themselves free and happy women, but the zeal of philanthropy
will not be gainsaid, and so the women of Utah are, all else failing,
to be saved from themselves. The "foul blot" of a servitude which
the serfs aver does not exist is to be wiped out by declaring 20,000
wives mistresses, their households illegal, and their future children
bastards!

"By Jove, sir, you shall have mustard with your beefsteak!"



CHAPTER VIII.

COULD THE MORMONS FIGHT?

    An unfulfilled prophecy--Had Brigham Young been still
    alive?--The hierarchy of Mormonism--The fighting Apostle and his
    colleagues--Plurality a revelation--Rajpoot infanticide: how it was
    stamped out--Would the Mormons submit to the same process?--Their
    fighting capabilities--Boer and Mormon: an analogy between the
    Drakensberg and the Wasatch ranges--The Puritan fanaticism of the
    Saints--Awaiting the fulness of time and of prophecy.

"I SAY, as the Lord lives, we are bound to become a sovereign State
in the Union or an independent nation by ourselves. I am still, and
still will be Governor of this Territory, to the constant chagrin of
my enemies, and twenty-six years shall not pass away before the Elders
of this Church will be as much thought of as kings on their thrones."
These were the words of Brigham Young on the last day of August, 1856.
And the Bill was passed in 1882.

Had Brigham Young been alive then, that prophecy would assuredly have
been fulfilled, for the coincidence of recent legislation with the date
he fixed, would have sufficed to convince him that the opportunity for
a display of the temporal power of his Church which he had foretold,
had arrived. Once before with similar exactness Brigham Young fixed a
momentous date.

He was standing in 1847 upon the site of the Temple, when suddenly, as
if under a momentary impulse, he turned to those who were with him and
said, "And now, if they will only let us alone for ten years, we will
not ask them for any odds."

Exactly ten years later, to the very day, and almost to the very hour
of the day, the news came of the despatch of a Federal army against
Salt Lake City. Brigham Young called his people together--and what a
nation they were compared to the fugitive crowd that had stood round
him in 1847!--and simply reminding them of his words uttered ten years
before, waited for their response. And as if they had only one voice
among them all, the vast assemblage shouted, "No odds."

And then and there he sent them into Echo canyon--and the Federal army
knows the rest.

Had he been alive to-day, that scene would probably have been repeated.

But Brigham Young is not alive. And his mantle has not fallen upon
any of the Elders of the Church. They are men of caution, and the
policy of Mormonism to-day is to temporize and to wait. All the States
are "United" in earnest against them. Brigham Young always taught
the people to reverence prophecy, but he taught them also to help to
fulfil it. But nowadays Mormons are told to stand by and see how the
Lord will work for them. And thus waiting, the Gentiles are gradually
creeping up to them. Every year sees new influences at work to destroy
the isolation of the Church, but the leaders originate no counteracting
influences. Their defences are being sapped, but no counter-mines
are run. As Gentile vigour grows aggressive, Mormonism seems to be
contracting its frontiers. There is no Buonaparte mind to compel
obedience. Mahomet is dead, and Ali, "the Lion of Allah," is dead, and
the Caliphate is now in commission.

President Taylor is a self-reliant and courageous man, but for a ruler
he listens too much to counsel. Though not afraid of responsibility,
it does not sit upon him as one born to the ermine. Brigham Young was
a natural king. President Taylor only suffices for an interregnum. Yet
now, if ever, Mormonism needs a master-spirit. Nothing demoralizes like
inaction. Men begin to look at things "from both sides," to compromise
with convictions, to discredit enthusiasm. This is just what they are
doing now. At one of the most eventful points of their history, they
find the voices of the Tabernacle giving forth uncertain sounds. Their
Urim and Thummim is dim; the Shekinah is flickering; their oracles
stutter. They are told to obey the laws and yet to live their religion.
In other words, to eat their cake and have it; to let go and hold
tight--anything that is contradictory, irreconcilable, and impossible.

Meanwhile, wealth and interests in outside schemes have raised up in
the Church a body of men of considerable temporal influence, who it
is generally supposed "outside" are half-hearted. The Gentiles lay
great stress on this. But no one should be deceived as to the real
importance of this "half-heartedness." In the first place, a single
word from President Taylor would extinguish the influence of these
men politically and religously, at once and for ever. A single speech
in the Tabernacle would reduce them to mere ciphers in Mormonism,
and the Church would really, therefore, lose nothing more by their
defection than the men themselves. But as a matter of fact they are
not half-hearted. I know the men whom the outside world refers to
personally, and I am certain therefore of my ground when I say that
Mormonism will find them, in any hour of need, ready to throw all their
temporal influence on to the side of the Church. The people need not
be apprehensive, for there is no treason in their camp. There may be
"Trimmers," but was there ever a movement that had no Trimmers?

The hierarchy in Utah stands as follows:--

President--John Taylor. Counsellors to the President--Joseph F.
Smith, G. Q. Cannon. Apostles--Wilford Woodruff, Franklin Richards,
C. C. Rich, Brigham Young, Moses Thatcher, M. Lyman, J. H. Smith, A.
Carrington, Erastus Snow, Lorenzo Snow, S. P. Teasdel, and J. Grant.
Counsellors to the Apostles--John W. Young, D. H. Wells.

Now in the present critical situation of affairs the personnel of this
governing body is of some interest. President Taylor I have already
spoken of. He is considered by all as a good head during an uneventful
period, and that he is doing sound, practical work in a general
administrative way is beyond doubt. But it is his misfortune to come
immediately after Brigham Young. It is not often in history that an
Aurungzebe follows an Akbar. But his counsellors, Apostles Cannon and
Joseph Smith, are emphatically strong men. The former is a staunch
Mormon, and a man of the world as well--perhaps the only Mormon who
is--while the latter is "the fighting Apostle," a man of both brains
and courage. Had he been ten years older he would probably have been
President now. Of the remainder the men of conspicuous mark are Moses
Thatcher, an admirable speaker and an able man, Merion Lyman, a very
sound thinker and spirited in counsel, and D. H. Wells--perhaps the
"strongest" unit in the whole hierarchy. He has made as much history
as any man in the Church, and as one of its best soldiers and one of
its shrewdest heads might have been expected to hold a higher rank
than he does. He was one of the Counsellors of Brigham Young, but on
the reconstruction of the governing body, accepted the position of
Counsellor to the Twelve. These five men, should the contingency for
any decisive policy arise, will certainly lead the Mormon Church.

I was speaking one day to a Mormon, a husband of several wives, and
was candidly explaining my aversion to that co-operative system of
matrimony which the world calls "polygamy," but which the Saints prefer
should be called "plurality." When I had finished, much to my own
satisfaction (for I thought I had proved polygamy wrong), my companion
knocked all my arguments, premises and conclusion together, into a
cocked hat, by saying,--

"You are unprejudiced--I grant that; and you take higher ground
for your condemnation of us than most do. But," said he, "you have
never referred to the fact that we Mormons believe plurality to be a
revelation from God. But we do believe it, and until that belief is
overthrown angels from Heaven cannot convince us. You spoke of the
power and authority of the United States. But what is that to the power
and authority of God? The United States cannot do more than exterminate
us for not abandoning plurality. But God can, and will, damn us to all
eternity if we do abandon it."

Now what argument but force can avail against such an attitude as this?
The better the Mormon, the harder he freezes to his religion--and
part of his religion is polygamy--so important a part, indeed, that
the whole future of the Saints is based upon it. The "Kingdom of
God" is arranged with reference to it. The hopes of Mormons of glory
and happiness in eternity depend upon it, and in this life men and
women are perpetually exhorted to live up to it. It is pure nonsense
therefore--so at least it seems to me--to request the Mormons to give
up plurality, and keep the rest. You might just as well cut off all
a man's limbs, and then tell him to get along "like a good and loyal
citizen," with only a stomach.

Force of course will avail, in the end, just as it did in India when
the Government determined to stamp out female infanticide among the
Rajpoots. There, the procedure was from necessity inquisitorial (for
the natives of the proscribed districts combined to prevent detection),
but it was eventually effectual. It was simply this. Whenever a family
was suspected of killing its female infants, a special staff of police
was quartered upon the village in which that family lived, at the
expense of the village, and maintained a constant personal watch over
each of the suspected wives during the period immediately preceding
childbirth. Nothing could have been so offensive to native sentiment
as such procedure, but nothing else was of any use. In the end the
suspects got wearied of the perpetual tyranny of supervision, and their
neighbours wearied of paying for the police, and infanticide as a
crime common to a whole community ceased after a few years to exist in
India. Now if the worst came to the worst, something of the same kind
is within the resources of the United States. Every polygamous family
in the Territory might be brought under direct police supervision at
the cost of their neighbours, and punishment rigidly follow every
conviction. This would stamp out polygamy in time.

But it would be a long time, a very long time, and I would hesitate
to affirm that Mormon endurance and submission would be equal to such
a severe and such a protracted ordeal. There is nothing in their past
history that leads me to look upon them as a people exceptionally
tolerant of ill-usage.

The infanticidal families in India were, it is true, of a fighting
caste and clan, but the suspected families were only a few hundreds
in number. They could not, like the Mormons, rely upon a strength of
twenty-five thousand adult males, an admirable strategic position,
and the help, if necessary, of twenty thousand picked "warriors" from
the surrounding Indian tribes; and it is mere waste of words to say
that the consciousness of strength has often got a great deal to do
with influencing the action of men who are subjected to violence. And
I doubt myself, looking to the recent history of England in Africa,
and Russia in Central Asia, whether the United States, when they
come to consider Mormon potentialities for resistance, will think it
worth while to resort to violence in vindication of a sentiment. The
war between the North and the South is not a case in point at all.
There was more than a mere "sentiment" went to the bringing on of
that war. Remember, I do not say that the Mormons entertain the idea
of having to fight the United States. I only say that they would not
be afraid to do it, in defence of their religion, if circumstances
compelled it. And I am only arguing from nature when I say that those
"circumstances" arrive at very different stages of suffering with
different individuals. The worm, for instance, does not turn till
it is trodden on. The grizzly bear turns if you sneeze at it. And I
am only quoting history when I say that thirty thousand determined
men, well armed, with their base of military supplies at their backs,
could defend a position of great strategical strength for--well, a
very considerable time against an army only ten times as numerous as
themselves--especially if that army had to defend a thousand miles of
communications against unlimited Indians.

It was my privilege when on the editorial staff of the Daily Telegraph
in London to tell the country in the leading columns of that paper what
I thought of the chances of success against the Boers of the Transvaal.
I said that one Boer on his own mountains was worth five British
soldiers, and that any army that went against those fanatical puritans
with less than ten to one in numbers, would find "the sword of the
Lord and of Gideon" too strong for them, and the Drakensberg range an
impregnable frontier. As an Englishman I regret that my words were so
miserably fulfilled, and England, after sacrificing a great number of
men and officers, decided that it was not worth while "for a sentiment"
to continue the war.

The points of resemblance between the Mormons and the Boers are rather
curious.

The Boers of the Transvaal, though of the same stock as the great
majority of the inhabitants of British Africa, were averse to the forms
of government that had satisfied the rest. So they migrated, after some
popular disturbances, and settled in another district where they hoped
to enjoy the imperium in imperio on which they had set their longings.
But British colonies again came up with them, and after a fight with
the troops, the Boers again migrated, and with their long caravans of
ox and mule waggons "trekked" away to the farthest inhabitable corner
of the continent. Here for a considerable time they enjoyed the life
they had sought for, established a capital, had their own governor,
whipped or coaxed the surrounding native tribes into docility, and,
after a fashion, throve. But yet once more the "thin red line" of
British possession crept up to them, and the Boers, being now at bay,
and having nowhere else to "trek" to, fought.

They were not exactly trained soldiers, but merely a territorial
militia, accustomed, however, to warfare with native tribes, and, by
the constant use of the rifle in hunting game, capital marksmen. So
they declared war against Great Britain, these three or four thousand
Boers, and having worked themselves up into the belief that they were
fighting for their religion, they unsheathed "the sword of the Lord
and of Gideon," threatened to call in the natives, and holding their
mountain passes, defied the British troops to force them. Nor without
success. For every time the troops went at them, they beat them, giving
chapter and verse out of the Bible for each whipping, and eventually
concluded their extraordinary military operations by an honourable
peace, and a long proclamation of pious thanksgiving "to the Lord God
omnipotent." To-day, therefore, Queen Victoria is "suzerain" of the
Transvaal, and the Boers govern themselves by a territorial government.
To their neighbours they are known as very pious, simple, and stubborn
people; very shrewd in making a bargain; very honest when it is
made; a pastoral and agricultural community, with strong objections
to "Gentiles," who, by the way, are never tired of reviling them,
especially with regard to alleged eccentricities in domestic relations.

Am I not right, then, in saying that the resemblance between the Boers
and the Mormons is "curious"?

When I speak of the Mormons as being prepared to accept the worst that
the commission under the Edmunds bill may do, it should be understood
that this readiness to suffer does not arise from any misconception of
their own strength. The Mormons are thoroughly aware of it; indeed, the
figures which I have given (25,000 adult males and 20,000 Indians) are
not accepted by all of them as representing their full numbers. They
fully understand also the capabilities of their position for defence,
and are not backward to appreciate the advantages which the length of
the Federal communications would give them for protracting a campaign.

Under the circumstances, therefore, the argument of a leading Mormon,
that "if the United States really believe the people of Utah to be the
desperate fanatics they call them, any action on their part that tends
to exasperate such fanatics is foolhardy," may be accepted as quite
seriously meant. For the Mormons, if bigoted about anything at all,
are so on this point--that they cannot be crushed. As the elect of
God, specially appointed by Him to prepare places of worship and keep
up the fires of a religion which is very soon to consume all others,
they cannot, they say, be moved until the final fulfilment of prophecy.
The Jews have still to be gathered together, and "the nations from
the north country" whose coming, according to the Bible, is to be so
terrible, are to find the Mormons, "the children of Ephraim," ready
prepared with such rites and such tabernacles that the "sons of Levi,"
the Jews, can perform their old worship, and, thus refreshed, continue
their progress to the Holy Land. "And their prophets shall come in
remembrance before the Lord, and they shall smite the rocks, and the
ice shall flow down at their presence, and a highway shall be cast up
in the midst of the great deep. And they shall come forth, and their
enemies shall become a prey unto them, and the everlasting hills shall
tremble at their presence." For this time, these men and women among
whom I have lived are actually waiting!

Of course, we ordinary Christians, whose religion sits lightly upon
us, cannot, without some effort, understand the stern faith with which
the Mormons cling to their translations of Old Testament prophecy. Nor
is it easy to credit the fierce earnestness with which, for instance,
the Saints look forward to the accomplishment of the promise that they
shall eventually possess Jackson County, Missouri. But if this spirit
of intense superstition is not properly taken into account by those
who try to make the Mormons alter their beliefs, they run the risk of
underestimating the seriousness of their attempt. If, on the other
hand, it is properly taken into account, the difficulty of forcing this
people to abandon their creeds will be at once seen to be very grave.

Except, perhaps, the Kurdish outbreak on the Persian frontier some
three years ago, there has been no problem like the Mormon one
presented to the consideration of modern Europe. In the case of the
Kurds, two nations, Turkey and Persia, were within an ace of war, in
consequence of the insurgents pretending that a point of religion
was involved, and popular fanaticism very nearly slipping beyond the
control of their respective governments.

When living at a distance from Salt Lake City, it is very difficult
indeed to recognize the truth of the situation. Until I went there I
always found that though in a general way the obstacles to a speedy
settlement were admitted, yet that somehow or another there was always
the afterthought that Mormonism was only an inflated imposture, and
that it would collapse at the first touch of law. It was allowed on all
hands that the position was a peculiar one, but it was hinted also that
it was an absurd one. "No doubt," it was argued, "the Mormons are an
obstinate set of men, but after all they have got common sense. When
they see that everybody is against them, that polygamy is contrary to
the spirit of the times, that all the future of Utah depends upon their
abandonment of it, that resistance is worse than senseless," and so
on, they will give in. Let opinion as to the "bigotry" of the Mormons
or their capacity for mischief be what it might, there was always a
qualifying addendum to the effect that "nothing would come of all this
fuss." The Mormons, in fact, were supposed to be "bluffing", and it was
taken for granted therefore that they had a weak hand.

But in Salt Lake City it is impossible to speak in this way. A
Mormon--a man of absolute honesty of speech--in conversation on this
subject declared to me that he could not abandon plurality without
apostatizing, and rather than do it, he would burn his house and
business premises down, go away to the Mexicans, die, if necessary.
Now, that man may any day be put to the very test he spoke of. He will
have to abandon polygamy, or else, if his adversaries are malicious,
spend virtually the whole of his life in jail. Which will he do? And
what will all the others of his way of thinking do? Will they defy the
law, or will they try to break it down by its own weight--that is to
say, load the files with such numbers of cases, and fill the prisons
with such numbers of convicts that the machinery will clog and break
down? The heroic alternatives of burning down their houses, going
off to Mexico, and dying will not be offered them. Their choice will
simply lie between monogamy (or celibacy) and prison, two very prosaic
things--and one or the other they must accept. Such at any rate is the
opinion of the world.

But the Mormons, as I have already shown, do not admit this simplicity
in the solution at all. From the point of view of the law-makers,
they allow that the option before them is very commonplace. But the
law-makers, they say, have omitted to take into consideration certain
facts which complicate the solution. For though, as I have said,
the majority may be expected to accept such qualified martyrdom as
is offered, and "await the Lord's time", yet there can be no doubt
whatever that strict Mormons will not acquiesce in the suppression of
their doctrines, and among so many who are strict is it reasonable to
expect that there will be no violent advisers? Their teachers have
perpetually taught them, and their leaders assured them that prophecy
had found its fulfilment in the establishment of the Church in Utah.
Here, and nowhere else, the Saints are to await "the fulness of time"
when the whole world shall yield obedience to their government, and
reverence to their religion. The Rocky Mountains, and no other, are
"the mountains" of Holy Writ where "Zion" was to be built; and they,
the Mormons, are the remnant of Ephraim that are to welcome and pass
on the returning Jews. How, then, can the Saints reconcile themselves
to another exodus? Mexico, they say, would welcome them; but if the
richest lands in the world, and all the privileges they ask for were
offered them, they could not stultify revelation and prophecy by
accepting the offer. Moreover, they have been assured times without
number that they should never be "driven" again, and times without
number that their enemies "shall not prevail against them." To many,
to most, this, of course, now points to some interposition of Divine
Providence in their favour. The crisis may seem dangerous, and the
opposition to them overwhelming. But they are convinced--it is no
mere matter of opinion with them--that if they are only patient under
persecution and keep on living their religion, the persecution will
cease, and the triumph of their faith be fulfilled. Europe and America,
they believe, are about to be involved in terrific disasters. Wars of
unprecedented magnitude are to be waged, and natural catastrophes,
unparalleled in history, are to occur. But, in the midst of all
this shock of thrones, this convulsion of the elements, Zion on the
Mountains is to be at peace and in prosperity. It will be the one still
harbour in all the ocean of troubles, and to it, as to their final
haven, all the elect of all the nations are to gather. The prudent,
therefore, looking forward to this apocalypse of general ruin, counsel
submission to the passing storm, endurance under legal penalties, and
fidelity to their doctrine.

But all are not prudent. Every Gethsemane has its Peter. And from that
memorable garden they draw a lesson. The Saviour, they say, meant
fighting, but when he saw that resistance to such odds as came against
him could have only ended in the massacre of his disciples, he went to
prison.

That Brigham Young, if alive, would have decided upon a military
demonstration, the sons of Zeruiah are very ready to believe, for they
say that, even if the worst were to happen and they had eventually to
capitulate under unreasonable odds, their position would be preferable
to that which they hold to-day. To-day they lie, the whole community
together, under the ban of civil disabilities, as a criminal class, at
the mercy of police--a proscribed people. In the future, if compelled
to surrender their arms, they would be in the position of prisoners on
parole, under the honourable conditions of a military capitulation. The
worst, therefore, that could happen would, they say, be better than
what is.

Such, at any rate, they assert, would have been the argument of Brigham
Young, and Gentiles even confess that if the late President were still
at the head of the Church the temptation for "a great bluff" would be
irresistible.



CHAPTER IX.

THE SAINTS AND THE RED MEN.

    Prevalent errors as to the red man--Secret treaties--The policy of
    the Mormons towards Indians--A Christian heathen--Fighting-strength
    of Indians friendly to Mormons.

I HAPPENED some time ago to repeat, in the presence of two "Gentiles,"
a Mormon's remark that the Indians were more friendly towards the
Saints than towards other Americans, and the comments of the two
gentlemen in question exactly illustrated the two errors which I find
are usually made on this subject.

One said: "Oh, yes, don't you know the Mormons have secret treaties
with the Indians?"

And the other: "And much good may they do them; these wretched Indians
are a half-starved, cricket-eating set, not worth a cent."

Now, I confess that till I came to Utah I had an idea that the Utes
were always "the Indians" that were meant when the friendly relations
of the Mormons with the red men were referred to. About secret treaties
I knew nothing, either one way or the other. But while I was there I
took much pains to arrive at the whole truth--the President of the
Church having very courteously placed the shelves of the Historian's
office at my service--and I found no reference whatever, even in
anti-Mormon literature, to any "secret treaty."

The Mormons themselves scorn the idea and give the following reasons:
1. No treaty made with a tribe of Indians could be kept secret. 2.
There is no necessity for a treaty of any kind, as the dislike of
the Indians to the United States is sufficiently hearty to make them
friendly to the Territory if it came to a choice between the one or the
other. 3. The conciliatory policy of the Church towards the Indians
obviates all necessity for further measures of alliance.

And this I believe to be the fact. Indeed, I know that Mormons can
go where Gentiles cannot, and that under a Mormon escort, lives are
safe in an Indian camp that without it would be in great peril. I know
further that on several occasions (and this is on official record) the
expostulations of Mormons have prevented Indians from raiding--and I
think this ought to be remembered when sinister constructions are put
upon the friendliness of Saints towards the Indians.

From the very first, the Church has inculcated forbearance and
conciliation towards the tribes, and even during the exodus from the
Missouri River, harassed though they sometimes were by Indians, the
Mormons, as a point of policy, always tried to avert a collision by
condoning offences that were committed, instead of punishing them. If
the red men came begging round their waggons they gave them food, and
if they stole--and what Indian will not steal, seeing that theft is
the road to honour among his people?--the theft was overlooked. Very
often, it is true, individual Mormons have avenged the loss of a horse
or a cow by taking a red man's life, but this was always in direct
opposition to the teachings of the Church, which pointed out that
murder in the white man was a worse offence than theft in the red, and
in opposition to the policy of the leaders, who have always insisted
that it was "cheaper to feed than to fight" the Indians. In spite,
however, of this treatment the tribes have again and again compelled
the Mormons to take the field against them, but as a rule the extent
of Mormon retaliation was to catch the plunderers, retake their stolen
stock, hang the actual murderers (if murder had been committed) and
let the remainder go after an amicable pow-wow. Strict justice was
as nearly as possible always adhered to, and whenever their word was
given, that word was kept sacred, even to their own loss.

Both these things, justice and truth, every Indian understands. They do
not practise them, but they appreciate them. Just as among themselves
they chivalrously undertake the support of the squaws and children of a
conquered tribe, or as they never steal property that has been placed
under the charge of one of their own tribe, so when dealing with white
men, they have learned to expect fairness in reprisals and sincerity
in speech. When they find themselves cheated, as they nearly always
are by "Indian agents," they cherish a grudge, and when they suffer an
unprovoked injury (as when emigrants shoot a passing red man just as
they would shoot a passing coyote), they wreak their barbarous revenge
upon the first victims they can find. From the Mormons they have always
received honest treatment, comparative fairness in trade and strict
truthfulness in engagements, while, taking men killed on both sides,
it is a question whether the red men have not killed more Mormons than
Mormons have red men.

During the war of 1865-67, I find, for instance, that all the recorded
deaths muster eighty-seven on the Indian side and seventy-nine on the
Mormon, while the latter, besides losing great numbers of cattle and
horses, having vast quantities of produce destroyed and buildings
burned down, had temporarily to abandon the counties of Piute and
Sevier, as well as the settlements of Berrysville, Winsor, Upper and
Lower Kanab, Shuesberg, Springdale and Northup, and many places in
Kane County, also some settlements in Iron County, while the total
cost of the war was over a million dollars--of which, by the way, the
Government has not repaid a Territory a cent. During the twenty years
preceding 1865 there had been numerous raids upon Mormon settlements,
most of them due to the thoughtless barbarity of passing emigrants; but
as a rule, the only revenge taken by the Mormons was expostulation, and
the despatch of missionaries to them with the Bible, and medicines and
implements of agriculture.

The result to-day is exactly what Brigham Young foresaw. The
Indians look upon the Mormons as suffering with themselves from the
earth-hunger of "Gentiles," and feel a community in wrong with them,
while they consider them different from all other white men in being
fair in their acts and straightforward in their speech. In 1847 a chief
of the Pottawatomies--then being juggled for the second time from a
bad reservation to a worse--came into the camp of the Mormons--then
for the second time flying from one of the most awful persecutions
that ever disgraced any nation--and on leaving spoke as spoke as
follows--(he spoke good French, by the way): "My Mormon brethren,--We
have both suffered. We must help one another, and the Great Spirit
will help us both. You may cut and use all the wood on our lands that
you wish. You may live on any part of it that we are not actually
occupying ourselves. Because one suffers, and does not deserve it, it
is no reason he shall suffer always. We may live to see all well yet.
However, if we do not, our children will. Good-bye."

Now, it strikes me that a Christian archbishop would find it hard
to alter the Red Indian's speech for the better. It is one of the
finest instances of untutored Christianity in history, and contrasts
so strangely with the hideous barbarities that make the history of
Missouri so infamous, that I can easily understand the sympathies of
Mormons being cast in with the Christian heathens they fled to, rather
than the heathen Christians they fled from. Nor from that day to this,
have the Mormons forgotten the hint the Pottawatomie gave them, and on
the ground of common suffering and by the example of a mutual sympathy
have kept up such relations with the Indians, even under exasperation,
that the red man's lodge is now open to the Mormon when it is closed to
the Gentile.

What necessity, then, have the Mormons for secret treaties With
the Indians? None whatever. The Indians have learned by the last
half-century's experience that every "treaty" made with them has only
proved a fraud towards their ruin, while during the same period they
have learned that the word of the Mormons, who never make treaties, can
be relied upon. So if the Saints were now to begin making treaties,
they would probably fall in the estimation of the Indians to the level
of the American Government, and participate in the suspicion which the
latter has so industriously worked to secure, and has so thoroughly
secured.

The other error commonly made as to the Indians is to underestimate
their strength. Now the Navajoes alone could bring into the field
10,000 fighting men; and, besides these, there are (specially friendly
to the Mormons) the Flatheads, the Shoshonees, the Blackfeet, the
Bannocks, part of the Sioux, and a few Apaches, with, of course, the
Utes of all kinds. The old instinct for the war-path is by no means
dead, as the recent troubles in the south of Arizona give dismal proof;
and a Mormon invitation would be quite sufficient to bring all "the
Lamanites" together into the Wasatch Mountains.

That any such idea is ever entertained by Mormons I heartily repudiate.
But I think it worth while to point out, that--if the influence of
the Mormons on the Indians is considered of sufficient importance
to base the charge of treasonable alliance upon it--it is quite
illogical to sneer at that influence as making no difference in the
case of difficulties arising. But as a point of fact, the Mormons have
no other secret in their relations with the red men than that they
treat them with consideration, and make allowances for their ethical
obliquities; and further, as a point of fact also, these same tribes,
"the Lamanites" of the Book of Mormon, "the Lost Tribes," are in
themselves so formidable that under white leadership they would make a
very serious accession of strength to any public enemy that should be
able to enlist them.



CHAPTER X.

REPRESENTATIVE AND UNREPRESENTATIVE MORMONISM.

    Mormonism and Mormonism--Salt Lake City not representative--The
    miracles of water--How settlements grow--The town of Logan:
    one of the Wonders of the West--The beauty of the valley--The
    rural simplicity of life--Absence of liquor and crime--A police
    force of one man--Temple mysteries--Illustrations of Mormon
    degradation--Their settlement of the "local option" question.

SALT Lake City is not the whole of "Mormonism." In the Eastern States
there is a popular impression that it is. But as a matter of fact, it
hardly represents Mormonism at all. The Gentile is too much there, and
Main Street has too many saloons. The city is divided into two parties,
bitterly antagonistic. Newspapers exchange daily abuse, and sectarians
thump upon their pulpit cushions at each other every Sunday. Visitors
on their travels, sight-seeing, move about the streets in two-horse
hacks, staring at the houses that they pass as if some monsters lived
in them. A military camp stands sentry over the town, and soldiers
slouch about the doors of the bars.

All this, and a great deal more that is to be seen in Salt Lake City,
is foreign to the true character of a Mormon settlement. Logan, for
instance (which I describe later on), is characteristic of Mormonism,
and nowhere so characteristic as in those very features in which it
differs from Salt Lake City. The Gentile does not take very kindly to
Logan, for there are no saloons to make the place a "live town," and
no public animosities to give it what they call "spirit;" everybody
knows his neighbour, and the sight-seeing fiend is unknown. The one and
only newspaper hums on its way like some self-satisfied bumble bee; the
opposition preacher, with a congregation of eight women and five men,
does not think it worth while, on behalf of such a shabby constituency,
to appeal to Heaven every week for vengeance on the 200,000 who don't
agree with him and his baker's dozen. There is no pomp and circumstance
of war to remind the Saints of Federal surveillance, no brass cannon
on the bench pointing at the town (as in Salt Lake City), no ragged
uniforms at street corners. Everything is Mormon. The biggest shop is
the Co-operative Store; the biggest place of worship the Tabernacle;
the biggest man the President of the Stake. Everybody that meets,
"Brothers" or "Sisters" each other in the streets, and after nightfall
the only man abroad is the policeman, who as a rule retires early
himself; and no one takes precautions against thieves at night. It is
a very curious study, this well-fed, neighbourly, primitive life among
orchards and corn-fields, this bees-in-a-clover-field life, with every
bee bumbling along in its own busy way, but all taking their honey back
to the same hive. It is not a lofty life, nor "ideal" to my mind, but
it is emphatically ideal, if that word means anything at all, and its
outcome, where exotic influences are not at work, is contentment and
immunity from crime, and an Old-World simplicity.

But Logan is not by any means a solitary illustration. For the Mormon
settlements follow the line of the valleys that run north and south,
and every one of them, where water is abundant, is a Logan in process
of development.

For water is the philosopher's stone; the fairy All-Good; the First
Cause; the everything that men here strive after as the source of
all that is desirable. It is silver and gold, pearls and rubies, and
virtuous women--which are "above rubies"--everything in fact that
is precious. It spirits up Arabian-Nights enchantments, and gives
industry a talisman to work with. Without it, the sage-brush laughs
at man, and the horn of the jack-rabbit is exalted against him. With
it, corn expels the weed, and the long-eared rodent is ploughed out
of his possession. Without it, greasewood and gophers divide the
wilderness between them. With it, homesteads spring up and gather the
orchards around them. Without it, the silence of the level desert is
broken only by the coyote and the lark. With it, comes the laughter
of running brooks, the hum of busy markets, and the cheery voices of
the mill-wheels by the stream. Without it, the world seems a dreary
failure. With it, it brightens into infinite possibilities. No wonder
then that men prize it, exhaust ingenuity in obtaining it, quarrel
about it. I wonder they do not worship it. Men have worshipped trees,
and wind, and the sun, for far less cause.

Nothing indeed is so striking in all these Mormon settlements as the
supreme importance of water. It determines locations, regulates their
proportions, and controls their prosperity. Here are thousands of acres
barren--though I hate using such a word for a country of such beautiful
wild flowers--because there is no water. There is a small nook bursting
with farmsteads, and trees, because there is water. Men buy and sell
water-claims as if they were mining stock "with millions in sight," and
appraise each other's estates not by the stock that grazes on them, or
the harvests gathered from them, but by the water-rights that go with
them. Thus, a man in Arizona buys a forty-acre lot with a spring on it,
and he speaks of it as 70,000 acres of "wheat." Another has acquired
the right of the head-waters of a little mountain stream; he is spoken
of as owning "the finest ranch in the valley." Yet the one has not put
a plough into the ground, the other has not a single head of cattle!
But each possessed the "open sesame" to untold riches, and in a country
given over to this new form of hydromancy was already accounted wealthy.

Every stream in Utah might be a Pactolus, every pool a Bethesda. To
compass, then, this miracle-working thing, the first energies of every
settlement are directed in the union. The Church comes forward if
necessary to help, and every one contributes his labour. At first the
stream where it leaves the canyon, and debouches upon the levels of
the valley, is run off into canals to north and south and west (for
all the streams run from the eastern range), and from these, like the
legs of a centipede, minor channels run to each farmstead, and thence
again are drawn off in numberless small aqueducts to flood the fields.
The final process is simple enough, for each of the furrows by which
the water is let in upon the field is in turn dammed up at the further
end, and each surrounding patch is thus in turn submerged. But the
settlement expands, and more ground is needed. So another canal taps
the stream above the canyon mouth, the main channels again strike off,
irrigating the section above the levels already in cultivation, and
overlapping the original area at either end. And every time increasing
population demands more room, the stream is taken off higher and higher
up the canyon. The cost is often prodigious, but necessity cannot stop
to haggle over arithmetic, and the Mormon settlements therefore have
developed a system of irrigation which is certainly among the wonders
of the West.

"Logan is the chief Mormon settlement in the Cache Valley, and is
situated about eighty miles to the north of Salt Lake City. Population
rather over 4000." Such is the ordinary formula of the guide book.
But if I had to describe it in few words I should say this: "Logan is
without any parallel, even among the wonders of Western America, for
rapidity of growth, combined with solid prosperity and tranquillity.
Population rather over 4000, every man owning his own farm. Police
force, two men--partially occupied in agriculture on their own account.
N.B.--No police on Sundays, or on meeting evenings, as the force are
otherwise engaged."

And writing sincerely I must say that I have seen few things in America
that have so profoundly impressed me as this Mormon settlement of
Logan. It is not merely that the industry of men and women, penniless
emigrants a few years ago, has made the valley surpassing in its
beauty. That it has filled the great levels that stretch from mountain
to mountain with delightful farmsteads, groves of orchard-trees, and
the perpetual charm of crops. That it has brought down the river from
its idleness in the canyons to busy itself in channels and countless
waterways with the irrigation and culture of field and garden; to lend
its strength to the mills which saw up the pines that grow on its
native mountains; to grind the corn for the 15,000 souls that live in
the valley, and to help in a hundred ways to make men and women and
children happy and comfortable, to beautify their homes, and reward
their industry. All this is on the surface, and can be seen at once by
any one.

But there is much more than mere fertility and beauty in Logan and
its surroundings, for it is a town without crime, a town without
drunkenness! With this knowledge one looks again over the wonderful
place, and what a new significance every feature of the landscape
now possesses! The clear streams, perpetually industrious in their
loving care of lowland and meadow and orchard, and so cheery, too,
in their incessant work, are a type of the men and women themselves;
the placid cornfields lying in bright levels about the houses are not
more tranquil than the lives of the people; the tree-crowded orchards
and stack-filled yards are eloquent of universal plenty; the cattle
loitering to the pasture contented, the foals all running about in
the roads, while the waggons which their mothers are drawing stand
at the shop door or field gate, strike the new-comer as delightfully
significant of a simple country life, of mutual confidence, and
universal security.

And yet I had not come there in the humour to be pleased, for I was not
well. But the spirit of the place was too strong for me, and the whole
day ran on by itself in a veritable idyll.

A hen conveying her new pride of chickens across the road, with a
shepherd dog loftily approving the expedition in attendance; a foal
looking into a house over a doorstep, with the family cat, outraged at
the intrusion, bristling on the stoop; two children planting sprigs of
peach blossoms in one of the roadside streams; a baby peeping through a
garden wicket at a turkey-cock which was hectoring it on the sidewalk
for the benefit of one solitary supercilious sparrow--such were the
little vignettes of pretty nonsense that brightened my first walk in
Logan. I was alone, so I walked where I pleased; took notice of the
wild birds that make themselves as free in the streets as if they were
away up in the canyons; of the wild flowers that still hold their own
in the corners of lots, and by the roadway; watched the men and women
at their work in garden and orchard, the boys driving the waggons
to the mill and the field, the girls busy with little duties of the
household, and "the little ones," just as industrious as all the rest,
playing at irrigation with their mimic canals, three inches wide, old
fruit-cans for buckets, and posies stuck into the mud for orchards. I
stopped to talk to a man here and a woman there; helped to fetch down
a kitten out of an apple-tree, and, at the request of a boy, some ten
years old, I should say, opened a gate to let the team he was driving,
or rather being walked along with, go into the lot.

It was a beautiful day, and all the trees were either in full bloom or
bright young leaf; and the conviction gradually grew upon me that I had
never, out of England, seen a place so simple, so neighbourly, so quiet.

Later on I was driven through the town to the Temple. The wide roads
are all avenued with trees, and behind trees, each in its own garden,
or orchard, or lot of farm-land, stands a ceaseless succession of
cottage homes. Here and there a "villa," but the great majority
"cottages." Not the dog-kennels in which the Irish peasantry are
content to grovel through life so long as they need not work and
can have their whisky. Not the hovels which in some parts of rural
England house the farm labourer and his unkempt urchins. But cleanly,
comfortable homes, some of adobe, some of wood, with porticos and
verandahs and other ornaments, six or eight or even ten rooms, with
barns behind for the cow and the horse and the poultry, bird-cages
at the doors, clean white curtains at the windows, and neatly bedded
flowers in the garden-plots. Hundred after hundred, each in its own lot
of amply watered ground, we passed the homes of these Mormon farmers,
and it was a wonderful thing to me--so fresh from the old country, with
its elegance and its squalor side by side; so lately from the "live"
cities of Colorado, with their murrain of "busted" millionaires and
hollow shells of speculative prosperity--this great township of an
equal prosperity and a universal comfort. Every man I met in the street
or saw in the fields owned the house which he lived in, and the ground
that his railings bounded. Moreover they were his by right of purchase,
the earnings of the work of his own two hands. No wonder, then, they
demean themselves like men.

I was driving with the President of the "stake"--such is the name
of the Church for the sub-divisions of its Territory--and the chief
official, therefore, of Logan, when, in a narrow part of the road we
met a down-trodden Mormon serf driving a loaded waggon in the opposite
direction. The President pulled a little to one side, motioning the man
to drive past. But the roadway thus left for him was rather rough and
this degraded slave of the Church, knowing the rule of the road (that a
loaded waggon has the right of way against all other vehicles), calmly
pointed with his whip-handle to the side of the road, and said to his
President, "You drive there." And the President did so, whereat the
down-trodden one proceeded on his way in the best of the road.

Now this may be accepted as an instance of that abject servitude which,
according to anti-Mormons, characterizes the followers of Mormonism. As
another illustration of the same awe-stricken subjection may be here
noted the fact, that whenever the President slackened pace, passers-by,
men and women, would come over to us, and shaking hands with the
President, exchange small items of domestic, neighbourly chat--the
health of the family, convalescence of a cow, and, speaking generally,
discuss Tommy's measles. Now, women would hardly waste a despot's time
with intelligence of an infant's third tooth, or a man expatiate on the
miraculous recovery of a calf from a surfeit of damp lucerne.

I chanced also one day to be with an authority when a man called in
to apologize for not having repaid his emigration money; and to me
the incident was specially interesting on this account, that very
few writers on the Mormons have escaped charging the Church with
acting dishonestly and usuriously towards its emigrants. I have read
repeatedly that the emigrants, being once in debt, are never able to
get out of debt; that the Church prefers they should not; that the
indebtedness is held in terrorem over them. But the man before me was
in exactly the same position as every other man in Logan. He had been
brought out from England at the expense of the Perpetual Emigration
Fund (which is maintained partly by the "tithings," chiefly by
voluntary donations), and though by his labour he had been able to pay
for a lot of ground and to build himself a house, to plant fruit-trees,
buy a cow, and bring his lot under cultivation, he had not been able to
pay off any of the loan of the Church. It stood, therefore, against him
at the original sum. But his delinquency distressed him, and "having
things comfortable about him," as he said, and some time to spare, he
came of his own accord to his "Bishop," to ask if he could not work of
part of his debt. He could not see his way, he said to any ready money,
but he was anxious to repay the loan, and he came, therefore, to offer
all he had--his labour. Now, I cannot believe that this man was abused.
I am sure he did not think he was abused himself. Here he was in Utah,
comfortably settled for life, and at no original expense to himself. No
one had bothered him to pay up; no one had tacked on usurious interest.
So he came, like an honest man, to make arrangements for satisfying a
considerate creditor, but all he got in answer was, that "there was
time enough to pay" and an exchange of opinions about a plough or a
harrow or something. And he went off as crushed down with debt as ever.
And he very nearly added to his debt on the way, by narrowly escaping
treading on a presumptuous chicken which was reconnoitring the interior
of the house from the door-mat.

To return to my drive. After seeing the town we drove up to the Temple.
The Mormon "temples" must not be mistaken for their "tabernacles."
The latter are the regular places of worship, open to the public. The
former are buildings strictly dedicated to the rites of the Endowments,
the meetings of the initiated brethren, and the ceremonial generally
of the sacred Masonry of Mormonism. No one who has not taken his
degrees in these mysteries has access to the temples, which are, or
will be, very stately piles, constructed on architectural principles
said by the Church to have been revealed to Joseph Smith piecemeal, as
the progress of the first Temple (at Kirkland) necessitated, and said
by the profane to be altogether contrary to all previously received
principles. However this may be, the style is, from the outside, not
so prepossessing as the cost of the buildings and the time spent upon
them would have led one to expect. The walls are of such prodigious
thickness, and the windows so narrow and comparatively small, that
the buildings seem to be constructed for defence rather than for
worship. But once within, the architecture proves itself admirable.
The windows gave abundant light and the loftiness of the rooms imparts
an airiness that is as surprising as pleasing, while the arrangement
of staircases--leading, as I suppose, from the rooms of one degree
in the "Masonry" to the next higher--and of the different rooms, all
of considerable size, and some of very noble proportions indeed, is
singularly good.

I ought to say that this Temple at Logan is the only one I have
entered, and it is only because it is not completed. This year the
building will be finished--so it is hoped--and the ceremony of
dedication will then attract an enormous crowd of Mormons. It is
something over 90 feet in height (not including the towers, which
are still wanting) and measures 160 feet by 70. On the ground floor,
judging from what I know of the secret ritual of the Church, are
the reception-rooms of the candidates for the "endowments," various
official rooms, and the font for baptism. The great laver, 10 feet
in diameter, will rest on the backs of twelve oxen cast in iron
(and modelled from a Devon ox bred by Brigham Young) and will be
descended to by flights of steps, the oxen themselves standing in
water half-knee-deep. On the next floor are the apartments in which
the allegorical panorama of the "Creation" and the "Fall of Man" will
be represented. Here, too, will be the "Veil," the final degree in
what might be called, in Masonic phrase, "craft" or "blue" Masonry,
and, except for higher honorary grades, the ultimate objective point
of Mormon initiation. Above these rooms is a vast hall, occupying the
whole floor, in which general assemblies of the initiated brethren and
"chapters" will be held. The whole forms a very imposing pile of great
solidity and some grandeur, built of a gloomy, slate-coloured stone (to
be eventually coloured a lighter tint), and standing on a magnificent
site, being raised above the town upon an upper "bench" of the slope,
and showing out superbly against the monstrous mountain about a mile
behind it. The mountain, of course, dwarfs the Temple by its proximity,
but the position of the building was undoubtedly "an architectural
inspiration," and gives the great pile all the dominant eminence which
Mormons claim for their Church.

From the platform of the future tower the view is one of the finest I
have ever seen. The valley, reaching for twenty miles in one direction,
and thirty in the other, with an average width of about ten miles, lies
beneath you, level in the centre, and gradually sloping on every margin
up to the mountains that bound it in. Immediately underneath you, Logan
spreads out its breadth of farm-land and orchard and meadow, with the
river--or rather two rivers, for the Logan forks just after leaving the
canyon--and the canal, itself a pleasant stream, carrying verdure and
fertility into every nook and corner. To right and left and in front,
delightful villages--Hirum, Mendon, Wellsville, Paradise, and the rest,
all of them miniature Logans--break the broad reaches of crop-land,
with their groves of fruit-trees, and avenues of willows and carob,
box-elder, poplar, and maple, while each of them seems to be stretching
out an arm to the other, and all of them trying to join hands with
Logan. For lines of homesteads and groups of trees have straggled away
from each pretty village, and, dotted across the intervening meadows
of lucerne and fields of corn, form links between them all. Behind
them rise the mountains, still capped and streaked with snow, but all
bright with grass upon their slopes. It was a delightful scene, and
required but little imagination to see the 15,000 people of the valley
grown into 150,000, and the whole of this splendid tract of land one
continuous Logan. And nothing can stop that day but an earthquake or
a chronic pestilence. For Cache Valley depends for its prosperity
upon something surer than "wild-cat" speculations, or mines that have
bottoms to fall out. The cumulative force of agricultural prosperity is
illustrated here with remarkable significance, for the town, that for
many years seemed absolutely stationary, has begun both to consolidate
and to expand with a determination that will not be gainsaid.

The sudden success of a mining camp is volcanic in its ephemeral
rapidity. The gradual growth of an agricultural town is like the
solid accretion of a coral island. The mere lapse of time will make
it increase in wealth, and with wealth it will annually grow more
beautiful. Even as it is, I think this settlement of Mormon farmers
one of the noblest of the pioneering triumphs of the Far West; and in
the midst of these breathless, feverish States where every one seems
to be chasing some will-o'-the-wisp with a firefly light of gold, or
of silver--where terrible crime is a familiar feature, where known
murderers walk in the streets, and men carry deadly weapons, where
every other man complains of the fortune he only missed making by an
accident, or laments the fortune he made in three days, and lost in as
many hours--it is surpassingly strange to step out suddenly upon this
tranquil valley, and find oneself among its law-abiding men. It is
exactly like stepping out of a mine shaft into the fresh pure air of
daylight.

The Logan police force is a good-tempered-looking young man. There is
another to help him, but if they had not something else to do they
would either have to keep on arresting each other, in order to pass the
time, or else combine to hunt gophers and chipmunks. As it is, they
unite other functions of private advantage with their constabulary
performances, and thus justify their existence. As one explanation of
the absence of crime, there is not a single licence for liquor in the
town.

Once upon a time there were three saloons in Logan. But one night a
Gentile, passing through the town, shot the young Mormon who kept one
of them, whereat the townsfolk lynched the murderer, and suppressed
all the saloons. After a while licences were again issued, but a
six months' experiment showed that the five arrests of the previous
half-year had increased under the saloon system to fifty-six, so
the town suppressed the licences again, and to-day you cannot buy
any liquor in Logan. I am told, however, that an apostate, who is
in business in the town, carries on a more or less clandestine
distribution of strong drinks; but any accident resulting therefrom,
another murder, for instance, would probably put an end to his trade
for ever, for it is not only the Mormon leaders, but the Mormon people
that refuse to have drunkards among them.

These facts about Logan are a sufficient refutation of the calumny so
often repeated by apostates and Gentiles, that the Mormons are not the
sober people they profess to be. The rules now in force in Logan were
once in force in Salt Lake City, but thanks to reforming Gentiles there
are now plenty of saloons and drunkards in the latter. At one time
there were none, but finding the sale of drink inevitable, the Church
tried to regulate it by establishing its own shops, and forbidding it
to be sold elsewhere. But the Federal judge refused the application.
So the city raised the saloon licence to 3600 dollars per annum! Yet,
in spite of this enormous tax, two or three bars managed to thrive,
and eventually numbers of other men, encouraged by the conduct of
the courts, opened drinking-saloons, refused to pay the licence, and
defied--and still defy--all efforts of the city to bring them under
control. In Logan, however, these are still the days of no drink, and
the days therefore of very little crime.



CHAPTER XI.

THROUGH THE MORMON SETTLEMENTS.

    Salt Lake City to Nephi--General similarity of the
    settlements--From Salt Lake Valley into Utah Valley--A
    lake of legends--Provo--Into the Juab valley--Indian
    reminiscences--Commercial integrity of the saints--At Nephi--Good
    work done by the saints--Type of face in rural Utah--Mormon
    "doctrine" and Mormon "meetings."

THE general resemblance between the populations of the various Mormon
settlements is not more striking than the general resemblance between
the settlements themselves.

Two nearly parallel ranges of the Rocky Mountains, forming together
part of the Wasatch range, run north and south through the length
of Utah, and enclose between them a long strip of more or less
desolate-looking land. Spurs run out from these opposing ranges, and
meeting, cut off this strip into "valleys" of various lengths, so that,
travelling from north to south, I crossed in succession, in the line
of four hundred miles or so, the Cache, Salt Lake, Utah, Juab, San
Pete, and Sevier valleys (the last enclosing Marysvale, Circle Valley
and Panguitch Valley), and having there turned the end of the Wasatch
range, travelled into Long Valley, which runs nearly east and west
across the Territory.

In the Cache and the Sevier valleys there are some noble expanses of
natural meadow, but in all the rest the soil, where not cultivated,
is densely overgrown with sage-brush, greasewood and rabbit-brush,
and in no case except the Cache Valley (by far the finest section of
the Territory) and Long Valley, is the water-supply sufficient to
irrigate the whole area enclosed. The proportions under cultivation
vary therefore according to the amount of the water, and the size
of the settlements is of course in an almost regular ratio with the
acreage under the plough. But all are exactly on the same pattern. Wide
streets--varying from 80 to 160 feet in width--avenued on either side
with cotton-wood, box-elder, poplar, and locust-trees, and usually with
a runnel of water alongside each side-walk, intersect each other at
right angles, the blocks thus formed measuring from four to ten acres.
These blocks hold, it may be, as many as six houses, but, as a rule,
three, two, or only one; while the proportion of fruit and shade-trees
to dwelling-houses ranges from a hundred to one to twenty to one. As
the lots are not occupied in any regular succession, there are frequent
gaps caused by empty blocks, while the streets towards the outer limits
of the towns are still half overgrown with the original sage-brush.
All the settlements therefore, resemble each other, except in size,
very closely, and may be briefly described as groves of trees and fruit
orchards with houses scattered about among them.

The settlements of the Church stretch in a line north and south
throughout the whole length of the Territory, and on reaching the Rio
Virgin, in the extreme south, follow the course of that river right
across Utah to the eastern frontier. The soil throughout the line north
and south appears to be of a nearly uniform character, as the same
wild plants are to be found growing on it everywhere, and the sudden
alternations of fertility and wilderness are due almost entirely to the
abundance or absence of water.

Leaving Salt Lake City to go south, we pass through suburbs of orchard
and garden, with nearly the whole town in panoramic review before us,
and find ourselves in half an hour upon levels beyond the reach of
the city channels, and where the sage-brush therefore still thrives
in undisturbed glory. Bitterns rise from the rushes, and flights of
birds wheel above the patches of scrub. And so to the Morgan smelting
camp, and then the Francklyn works, where the ore of the Horn Silver
Mine is worked, and then the Germania, one of the oldest smelting
establishments in the Territory, where innocent ore of all kinds is
taken in and mashed up into various "bullions"--irritamenta malorum.
Two small stations, each of them six peach-trees and a shed, slip by,
and then Sandy, a small mining camp of poor repute, shuffles past,
and next Draper, an agricultural settlement that seems to have grown
fruit-trees to its own suffocation.

The mountains have been meanwhile drawing gradually closer together,
and here they join. Salt Lake Valley ends, and Utah Valley begins, and
crossing a "divide" we find the levels of the Utah Lake before us,
and the straggling suburbs of Lehi about us. These scattered cottages
gradually thicken into a village towards the lake, and form a pleasant
settlement of the orthodox Mormon type. The receipt for making one of
these ought to be something as follows: Take half as much ground as
you can irrigate, and plant it thickly with fruit-trees. Then cut it
up into blocks by cutting roads through it at right angles; sprinkle
cottages among the blocks, and plant shade-trees along both sides of
the roads. Then take the other half of your ground and spread it out in
fields around your settlement, sowing to taste.

The actual process is, of course, the above reversed. A log hut and an
apple-tree start together in a field of corn, and the rest grows round
them. But my receipt looks the easier of the two.

Beyond Lehi, and all round it, cultivation spreads almost
continuously--alternating delightfully with orchards and groves and
meadows--to American Fork, a charming settlement, smothered, as usual,
in fruit and shade-trees. The people here are very well-to-do, and
they look it; and their fields and herds of cattle have overflowed and
joined those of Pleasant Grove--another large and prosperous Mormon
settlement that lies further back, and right under the hills. It would
be very difficult to imagine sweeter sites for such rural hamlets than
these rich levels of incomparable soil stretching from the mountains to
the lake, and watered by the canyon streams.

"Great Salt Lake" is, of course, the Utah Lake of the outside world.
But "Utah Lake" proper, is the large sheet of fresh water which lies
some thirty miles south of Salt Lake City, and gives its name to the
valley which it helps to fertilize. All around it, except on the
western shore, the Mormons have planted their villages, so that from
Lehi you can look out on to the valley, and see at the feet of the
encircling hills, and straggling down towards the lake, a semicircle
of settlements that, but for the sterility of the mountain slopes on
the west, might have formed a complete ring around it. But no springs
rise on the western slopes, and the settlements of the valleys always
lie, therefore, on the eastern side, unless some central stream gives
facilities for irrigation on the western also.

Utah Lake is a lake of legends. In the old Indian days it was held in
superstitious reverence as the abode of the wind spirits and the storm
spirits, and as being haunted by monsters of weird kind and great
size. Particular spots were too uncanny for the red men to pitch their
lodges there; and even game had asylum, as in a city of refuge, if it
chanced to run in the direction of the haunted shore. In later times,
too, the Utah Lake has borne an uncomfortable reputation as the domain
of strange water-apparitions, and several men have recorded visions
of aquatic monsters, for which science as yet has found no name,
but which, speaking roughly, appear to have been imitations of that
delightful possibility, the sea serpent. Science, I know, goes dead
against such gigantic worms, but this wonderful Western country has
astonishment in store for the scientific world. If half I am told about
the wondrous fossils of Arizona and thereabouts be true, it may even be
within American resources to produce the kraken himself. In the mean
time, as a contribution towards it, and a very tolerable instalment,
too, I would commend to notice the great snake of the Utah Lake. It has
frightened men--and, far better evidence than that, it has been seen by
children when playing on the shore. I say "better," because children
are not likely to invent a plausible horror in order to explain their
sudden rushing away from a given spot with terrified countenances and
a consistent narrative--a horror, too, which should coincide with the
snake superstitions of the Pi-Ute Indians. Have wise men from the East
ever heard of this fabled thing? Does the Smithsonian know of this
terror of the lake--this freshwater kraken--this new Mormon iniquity?

Visitors have made the American Fork canyon too well known to need
more than a reference here, but the Provo canyon, with its romantic
waterfalls and varied scenery, is a feature of the Utah Valley which
may some day be equally familiar to the sight-seeing world. The
botanist would find here a field full of surprises, as the vegetation
is of exceptional variety, and the flowers unusually profuse. Down
this canyon tumbles the Provo River; and as soon as it reaches the
mouth--thinking to find the valley an interval of placid idleness
before it attains the final Buddhistic bliss of absorption in the lake,
the Nirvana of extinguished individuality--it is seized upon, and
carried off to right and left by irrigation channels, and ruthlessly
distributed over the slopes. And the result is seen, approaching Provo,
in magnificent reaches of fertile land, acres of fruit-trees, and miles
of crops.

Provo is almost Logan over again, for though it has the advantage over
the northern settlement in population, it resembles it in appearance
very closely. There is the same abundance of foliage, the same width
of water-edged streets, the same variety of wooden and adobe houses,
the same absence of crime and drunkenness, the same appearance of solid
comfort. It has its mills and its woollen factory, its "co-op." and
its lumber-yards. There is the same profusion of orchard and garden,
the same all-pervading presence of cattle and teams. The daily life
is the same too, a perpetual industry, for no sooner is breakfast
over than the family scatters--the women to the dairy and household
work, the handloom and the kitchen; the men to the yard, the mill,
and the field. One boy hitches up a team and is off in one direction;
another gets astride a barebacked horse and is off in another; a third
disappears inside a barn, and a fourth engages in conflict with a drove
of calves. But whatever they are doing, they are all busy, from the old
man pottering with the water channels in the garden to the little girls
pairing off to school; and the visitor finds himself the only idle
person in the settlement.

From Provo--through its suburbs of foliage and glebeland--past
Springville, a sweet spot, lying back under the hills with a bright
quick stream flowing through it and houses mobbed by trees. Here are
flour-mills and one of the first woollen mills built in Utah. In the
days of its building the Indians harried the valley, and young men
tell how as children they used to lie awake at nights to listen to the
red men as they swept whooping and yelling through the quiet streets
of the little settlement; how the guns stood always ready against the
wall, and the windows were barricaded every night with thick pine
logs. What a difference now! Further on, but still looking on to the
lake, is Spanish Fork (nee Palmyra), where, digging a water channel
the other day, the spade turned up an old copper image of the Virgin
Mary, and some bones. This takes back the Mormon settlement of to-day
to the long-ago time when Spanish missionaries preached of the Pope to
the Piutes, and gave but little satisfaction to either man or beast,
for their tonsured scalps were but scanty trophies and the coyote
found their lean bodies but poor picking. Only fifteen years ago the
Navajos came down into the valley through the canyon which the Denver
and Rio Grande line now traverses, but the Mormons were better prepared
than the Spanish missionaries, and hunted the Navajo soul out of the
Indians, so that Spanish Fork is now the second largest settlement
in the valley, and the Indians come there begging. They are all of
the "tickaboo" and "good Injun" sort, the "how-how" mendicants of
the period. All the inhabitants are as good an illustration of the
advantages of co-operation in stores, farm-work, mills--everything--as
can well be adduced.

Co-operation, by the way, is an important feature of Mormon life, and
never, perhaps, so much on men's tongues and in their minds as at the
present time. The whole community has been aroused by the consistent
teaching of their leaders in their addresses at public "meetings,"
in their prayers in private households, to a sense of the "suicidal
folly," as they call it, of making men wealthy (by their patronage) who
use their power against the Saints; and the Mormons have set themselves
very sincerely to work to trade only with themselves and to starve out
the Gentiles. And it is very difficult indeed for an unprejudiced man
not to sympathize in some measure with the Mormons. By their honesty
they have made the name "Mormon" respected in trade all over America,
and have attracted shopkeepers, who on this very honesty have thriven
and become wealthy in Utah--and yet some of these men, knowing nothing
of the people except that they are straightforward in their dealings
and honourable in their engagements, join in the calumny that the
Mormons are a "rascally," "double-dealing" set. For my own part, I
think the Church should have starved out some of these slanderers
long ago. Even now it would be a step in the right direction if the
Church slipped a "fighting apostle" at the men who go on day after
day saying and writing that which they know to be untrue, calling,
for instance, virtuous, hard-working men and women "the villainous
spawn of polygamy," and advocating the encouragement of prostitutes
as a "reforming agency for Mormon youth"! Meanwhile "co-operation" as
a religious duty is the doctrine while of the day, and Gentile trade
is already suffering in consequence. The movement is a very important
one to the Territory, for if carried out on the proper principles
of co-operation, the people will live more cheaply here than in any
other State in America. As it is, many imported articles, thanks to
co-operative competition, are cheaper here than further east, and when
the boycotting is in full swing many more articles will also come down
in price, as the Gentiles' profits will then be knocked off the cost
to the purchaser. Every settlement, big and little, has its "co-op.,"
and the elders when on tour through the outlying hamlets lose no
opportunity for encouraging the movement and extending it.

Passing Spanish Fork, and its outlying herds of horses, we see,
following the curve Of the lake, Salem, a little community of farmers
settled around a spring; Payson, called Poteetnete in the old Indian
days--after a chief who made life interesting, not to say exciting, for
the early settlers--Springlake villa, where one family has grown up
into a hamlet, and grown out of it, too, for they complain that they
have not room enough and must go elsewhere; and Santaquin, a little
settlement that has reached out its fields right across the valley
to the opposite slope of the hills. This was the spot where Abraham
Butterfield, the only inhabitant of the place at the time, won himself
a name among the people by chasing off a band of armed Indians, who
had surprised him at his solitary work in the fields, by waving his
coat and calling out to imaginary friends in the distance to "Come
on." The Indians were thoroughly fooled, and fled back up the country
incontinently, while Abraham pursued them hotly, brandishing his old
coat with the utmost ferocity, and vociferously rallying nobody to the
bloody attack.

Here Mount Nebo, the highest elevation in the Territory was first
pointed out to me--how tired I got of it before I had done!--and
through fields of lucerne we passed from the Utah into the Juab Valley
and an enormous wilderness of sage-brush. It is broken here and
there by an infrequent patch of cultivation, and streaks of paling
go straggling away across the grey desert. But without water it is a
desperate section, and the pillars of dust moving across the level, and
marking the track of the sheep that wandered grazing among the sage,
reminded me of the sand-wastes of Beluchistan, where nothing can move a
foot without raising a tell-tale puff of dust.

There, the traveller, looking out from his own cloud of sand, sees
similar clouds creeping about all over the plain, judges from their
size the number of camels or horses that may be stirring, and draws
his own conclusions as to which may, be peaceful caravans, and which
robber-bands. By taking advantage of the wind, the desert banditti
are able to advance to the attack, just as the devil-fish do on the
sea-bottom, under cover of sand-clouds of their own stirring up; and
the first intimation which the traveller has of the character of those
who are coming towards him, is the sudden flash of swords and glitter
of spearheads that light up the edges of the advancing sand, just as
lightning flits along the ragged skirts of a moving thunder-cloud.

But here there are no Murri or Bhoogti horsemen astir, and the Indians,
Piutes or Navajos, have not acquired Beluchi tactics. These moving
clouds here are raised by loitering sheep, formidable only to Don
Quixote and the low-nesting ground-larks. They are close feeders,
though, these sheep, and it is poor gleaning after them, so it is a
rule throughout the Territory that on the hills where sheep graze, game
need not be looked for.

An occasional ranch comes in sight, and along the old county road a
waggon or two goes crawling by, and then we reach Mona, a pretty little
rustic spot, but the civilizing radiance of corn-fields gradually dies
away, and the relentless sage-brush supervenes, with here and there a
lucid interval of ploughed ground in the midst of the demented desert.
With water the whole valley would be superbly fertile, as we soon see,
for there suddenly breaks in upon the monotony of the weed-growths
a splendid succession of fields, long expanses of meadowland, large
groves of orchards, and the thriving settlement of Nephi.

Like all other prosperous places in Utah, it is almost entirely Mormon.
There is one saloon, run by a Mormon, but patronized chiefly by the
"outsiders"--for such is the name usually given to the "Gentiles" in
the settlement--and no police. Local mills meet local requirements,
and the "co-op." is the chief trading store of the place. There are no
manufactures for export, but in grain and fruit there is a considerable
trade. It is a quaint, straggling sort of place, and, like all these
settlements, curiously primitive. The young men use the steps of the
co-operative store as a lounge, and their ponies, burdened with huge
Mexican saddles and stirrups that would do for dog-kennels, stand
hitched to the palings all about. The train stops at the corner of the
road to take up any passengers there may be. Deer are sometimes killed
in the streets, and eagles still harry the chickens in the orchards.
Wild-bird life is strangely abundant, and a flock of "canaries"--a very
beautiful yellow siskin--had taken possession of my host's garden.
"We do catch them sometimes," said his wife, "but they always starve
themselves, and pine away till they are thin enough to get through
the bars of the cage, and so we can never keep them." A neighbour who
chanced in, was full of canary-lore, and I remember one incident that
struck me as very pretty. He had caught a canary and caged it, but the
bird refused to be tamed, and dashed itself about the cage in such a
frantic way that out of sheer pity he let the wild thing go. A day or
two later it came back, but with a mate, and when the cage was hung out
the two birds went into captivity together, of their own free-will, and
lived as happily as birds could live!

My host was a good illustration of what Mormonism can do for a man. In
Yorkshire he was employed in a slaughtering-yard, and thought himself
lucky if he earned twelve shillings a week. The Mormons found him,
"converted" him, and emigrated him. He landed in Utah without a cent
in his pocket, and in debt to the Church besides. But he found every
one ready to help him, and was ready to help himself, so that to-day
he is one of the most substantial men in Nephi, with a mill that cost
him $10,000 to put up, a shop and a farm, a house and orchard and
stock. His family, four daughters and a son, are all settled round him
and thriving, thanks to the aid he gave them--"but," said he, "if the
Mormons had not found me, I should still have been slaughtering in the
old country, and glad, likely, to be still earning my twelve shillings
a week." Another instance from the same settlement is that of a boy
who, five years ago, was brought out here at the age of sixteen. His
emigration was entirely paid for by the Church. Yet last year he sent
home from his own pocket the necessary funds to bring out his mother
and four brothers and sisters! God speed these Mormons, then. They
are doing both "the old country and the new" an immense good in thus
transforming English paupers into American farmers--and thus exchanging
the vices and squalor of English poverty for the temperance, piety, and
comfort of these Utah homesteads. I am not blind to their faults. My
aversion to polygamy is sincere, and I find also that the Mormons must
share with all agricultural communities the blame of not sacrificing
more of their own present prospects for the sake of their children's
future, and neglecting their education, both in school and at home. But
when I remember what classes of people these men and women are chiefly
drawn from, and the utter poverty in which most of them I cannot, in
sincerity, do otherwise than admire and respect the system which has
fused such unpromising material of so many nationalities into one
homogeneous whole.

For myself, I do not think I could live among the Mormons happily, for
my lines have been cast so long in the centres of work and thought,
that a bovine atmosphere of perpetual farms suffocates me. I am
afraid I should take to lowing, and feed on lucerne. But this does
not prejudice me against the men and women who are so unmistakably
happy. They are uncultured, from the highest to the lowest. But the
men of thirty and upwards remember these valleys when they were utter
deserts, and the Indian was lord of the hills! As little children they
had to perform all the small duties about the house, the "chores," as
they are called; as lads they had to guard the stock on the hills; as
young men they were the pioneers of Utah. What else then could they be
but ignorant--in the education of schools, I mean? Yet they are sober
in their habits, conversation, and demeanour, frugal, industrious,
hospitable, and God-fearing. As a people, their lives are a pattern to
an immense number of mankind, and every emigrant, therefore, taken up
out of the slums of manufacturing cities in the old countries, or from
the hideous drudgery of European agriculture, and planted in these Utah
valleys, is a benefit conferred by Mormonism upon two continents at
once.

To return to Nephi. I went to a "meeting" in the evening, and to
describe one is to describe all. The old men and women sit in
front--the women, as a rule, all together in the body of the room, and
the men at the sides. How this custom originated no one could tell me;
but it is probably a survival of habit from the old days when there
was only room enough for the women to be seated, and the men stood
round against the walls, and at the door. As larger buildings were
erected, the women, as of old, took their accustomed seats together
in the centre, and the men filled up the balance of the space. The
oldest being hard of hearing and short of sight, would naturally, in an
unconventional society, collect at the front of the audience. Looking
at them all together, they are found to be exactly what one might
expect--a congregation of hard-featured, bucolic faces, sun-tanned and
deep-lined. Here and there among them is a bright mechanic's face, and
here and there an unexpected refinement of intelligence. But taken in
the mass, they are precisely such a congregation as fills nine-tenths
of the rural places of worship all the world over. Conspicuously
absent, however, is the typical American face, for the fathers and
mothers among the Mormons are of every nationality, and the sons and
daughters are a mixture of all. In the future this race should be a
very fine one, for it is chiefly recruited from the hardier stocks,
the English, Scotch, and Scandinavian, while their manner of life is
pre-eminently fitted for making them stalwart in figure, and sound in
constitution.

The meeting opens with prayer, in which the Almighty is asked for
blessings upon the whole people, upon each class of it, upon their
own place in particular, upon all the Church authorities, and upon
all friends of the Mormons. But never, so far as I have heard, are
intercessions made, in the spirit of New Testament teaching, for the
enemies of the Church. References to the author of the Edmunds Bill
are often very pointed and vigorous. After the prayer comes a hymn,
sung often to a lively tune, and accompanied by such instrumental
music as the settlement can rely upon, after which the elders address
the people in succession. These addresses are curiously practical.
They are temporal rather than spiritual, and concern themselves with
history, official acts, personal reminiscences, and agricultural
matter rather than points of mere doctrine. But as a fact, temporal
and spiritual considerations are too closely blended in Mormonism to
be disassociated. Thus references to the Edmunds Bill take their place
naturally among exhortations to "live their religion", and to "build up
the kingdom" in spite of "persecution." Boycotting Gentile tradesmen
is similarly inculcated as showing a pious fidelity to the interests
of the Church. These are the two chief topics of all addresses, but
a passing reference to a superior class of waggon, or a hope that
every one will make a point of voting in some coming election, is
not considered out of place, while personal matters, the health of
the speaker or his experiences in travel, are often thus publicly
commented upon. The result is, that the people go away with some
tangible facts in their heads, and subjects for ordinary conversation
on their tongues, and not, as from other kinds of religious meetings,
with only generalities about their souls and the Ten Commandments. In
other countries the gabble of small-talk that immediately overtakes
a congregation let out of church sounds very incongruous with the
last notes of the organ voluntary that play them out of the House of
God. But here the people walking homeward are able to continue the
conversation on exactly the same lines as the addresses they have
just heard, to renew it the next day, to carry it about with them
as conversation from place to place, and thus eventually to spread
the "doctrine" of the elders over the whole district. A fact about
waggon-buying sticks where whole sermons about salvation by faith would
not.



CHAPTER XII.

FROM NEPHI TO MANTI.

    English companies and their failures--A deplorable neglect of
    claret cup--Into the San Pete Valley--Reminiscences of the
    Indians--The forbearance of the red man--The great temple at
    Manti--Masonry and Mormon mysteries--In a tithing-house.

FROM Nephi, a narrow-guage line runs up the Salt Creek canyon, and
away across a wilderness to a little mining settlement called Wales,
inhabited by Welsh Mormons who work at the adjacent coal-mines. The
affair belongs to an English company, and it is worth noting that
"English companies" are considered here to be very proper subjects
for jest. When nobody else in the world will undertake a hopeless
enterprise, an English company appears to be always on hand to embark
in it, and this fact displays a confidence on the part of Americans in
British credulity, and a confidence on the part of the Britishers in
American honesty, which ought to be mutually instructive. Meanwhile
this has nothing to do with these coal-mines in the San Pete Valley,
which, for all I know, may be very sound concerns, and very profitable
to the "English company" in question. I hope it is. The train was
rather a curious one, though, for it stopped for passengers at the
corner of the street, and when we got "aboard," we found a baggage
car the only vehicle provided for us. A number of apostles and elders
were on Conference tour, and the party, therefore, was a large one; so
that, if the driver had been an enthusiastic anti-Mormon, he might have
struck a severe blow at the Church by tilting us off the rails. The
Salt Creek canyon is not a prepossessing one, but there grew in it an
abundance of borage, the handsome blue heads of flowers showing from
among the undergrowth in large patches.

What a waste of borage! Often have I deplored over my claret in India
the absence of this estimable vegetable, and here in Utah with a
perfect jungle of borage all about me, I had no claret! I pointed out
to the apostles with us that temperance in such a spot was flying
in the face of providence, and urged them to plant vineyards in
the neighbourhood. But they were not enthusiastic, and I relapsed
into silent contemplation over the incredible ways of nature, that
she should thus cast her pearls of borage before a community of
teetotallers.

Traversing the canyon, we enter San Pete Valley, memorable for the
Indian War of 1865-67, but in itself as desolate and uninteresting a
tract of country as anything I have ever seen. Ugly bald hills and
leprous sand-patches in the midst of sage-brush, combined to form a
landscape of utter dreariness; and the little settlements lying away
under the hills on the far eastern edge of the valley--Fountain Green,
Maroni, and Springtown--seemed to me more like penal settlements
than voluntary locations. Yet I am told they are pretty enough, and
certainly Mount Pleasant, the largest settlement in the San Pete
country, looked as if it deserved its name. But it stands back well out
of the desperate levels of the valley, and its abundant foliage tells
of abundant water. A pair of eagles circled high up in the sky above
us as we rattled along, expecting us apparently to die by the way, and
hoping to be our undertakers. A solitary coyote was pointed out to me,
a lean and uncared-for person, that kept looking back over its shoulder
as it trotted away, as if it had a lingering sort of notion that a
defunct apostle might by chance be thrown overboard. It was a hungry
and a thirsty looking country, and Wales, where we left our train, was
a dismal spot. Here we found waggons waiting for us, and were soon on
our way across the desert, passing a settlement-oasis now and again,
and crossing the San Pete "river," which here sneaks along, a muddy,
shallow stream, at the bottom of high, willow-fringed banks. And so
to Fort Ephraim, a quaint little one-street sort of place that looks
up to Manti, a few miles off, as a little boy looks up to his biggest
brother, and to Salt Lake City as a cat might look up to a king.

In 1865-67, however, it was an important point. Several companies of
the Mormon militia were mustered here, and held the mountains and
passes on the east against the Indians, guarded the stock gathered here
from the other small settlements that had been abandoned, and took part
in the fights at Thistle Creek, Springtown, Fish Lake, Twelve Mile
Creek Gravelly Ford, and the rest, where Black Hawk and his flying
squadron of Navajos and Piutes showed themselves such plucky men. It
is a pity, I think, that the history of that three years' campaign has
never been sketched, for, as men talk of it, it must have abounded with
stirring incident and romance. Besides, a well-written history of such
a campaign, with the lessons it teaches, might be useful some day--for
the fighting spirit of the Indians is not broken, and when another
Black Hawk appears upon the scene, 1865 might easily be re-enacted,
and Fort Ephraim once more be transformed from a farming hamlet to a
military camp.

Yet I have often wondered at the apathy or the friendship of the
Indians. Herds of cattle and horses and sheep wander about among the
mountains virtually unguarded. Little villages full of grain, and
each with its store well stocked with sugar, and tobacco, and cloths,
and knives, and other things that the Indians prize, lie almost
defenceless at the mouths of canyons. Yet they have not been molested
for the last fifteen years. I confess that if I were an Indian chief, I
should not be able to resist the temptation of helping my tribe to an
occasional surfeit of beef, with the amusement thrown in of plundering
a co-operative store. But the Mormons say that the Indian is more
honest than a white man and, in illustration of this, are ready to
give innumerable instances of an otherwise inexplicable chivalry. For
one thing, though, the Mormons are looked upon by the Indians in quite
a different light to other Americans, for they consider them to be
victims, like themselves, of Federal dislike, while both as individuals
and a class they hold them in consideration as being superior to Agents
in fidelity to engagements. So that the compliment of honesty is
mutually reciprocated. To illustrate this aspect of the Mormon-Indian
relations, some Indians came the other day into a settlement and
engaged in a very protracted pow-wow, the upshot of all their
roundabout palaver being this, that inasmuch as they, the Indians, had
given Utah to the Mormons, it was preposterous for the Mormons to pay
the Government for the land they took up!

From Fort Ephraim to Manti the road lies chiefly through unreclaimed
land, but within a mile or two of the town the irrigated suburbs of
Manti break in upon the sage-brush, and the Temple, which has been
visible in the distance half the day, grows out from the hills into
definite details. The site of this imposing structure certainly
surprised me both for the fine originality of its conception, and the
artistic sympathy with the surrounding scenery, which has directed
its erection. The site originally was a rugged hill slope, but this
has been cut out into three vast semicircular terraces, each of which
is faced with a wall of rough hewn stone, seventeen feet in height.
Ascending these by wide flights of steps, you find yourself on a
fourth level, the hill top, which has been levelled into a spacious
plateau, and on this, with its back set against the hill, stands the
temple. The style of Mormon architecture, unfortunately, is heavy and
unadorned, and in itself, therefore, this massive pile, 160 feet in
length by 90 wide, and about 100 high, is not prepossessing, But when
it is finished, and the terrace slopes are turfed, and the spaces
planted out with trees, the view will undoubtedly be very fine, and
the temple be a building that the Mormons may well be proud of. Looked
at from the plain, with the stern hills behind it, the edifice is
seen to be in thoroughly artistic harmony with the scene, while the
enormous expenditure of labour upon its erection is a matter for
astonishment. The plan of the building inside differs from those of
the temples at Logan, St. George, and Salt Lake City, which again
differ from each other, for it is a curious fact that the ritual of
the secret ceremonies to which these buildings are chiefly devoted,
is still under elaboration and imperfect, so that each temple in turn
partially varies from its predecessor, to suit the latest alterations
made in the Endowments and other rites celebrated within its walls. In
my description of the Logan Temple, I gave a sketch of the purposes for
which the various parts of the building were intended. That sketch, of
course, cannot pretend to be exact, for only those Mormons who have
"worked" through the degrees can tell the whole truth; and as yet no
one has divulged it. But with a general knowledge of the rites, and
an intimate acquaintance with freemasonry, I have, I believe, put
together the only reliable outline that has ever been published. The
Manti temple will have the same arrangements of baptismal font and
dressing-rooms on the ground floor, but as well as I could judge from
the unfinished state of the building, the "endowments," in the course
of which are symbolical representations of the Creation, Temptation and
Fall, will be spread over two floors, the apartment for "baptism for
the dead" occupying a place on the lower. The "sealing" is performed on
the third. I have an objection to prying into matters which the Mormons
are so earnest in keeping secret, but as a mason, the connexion between
Masonry and Mormonism is too fascinating a subject for me to resist
curiosity altogether.

As a settlement, Manti is pretty, well-ordered and prosperous. The
universal vice of unbridged water-courses disfigures its roads just
as it does those of every other place (Salt Lake City itself not
excepted), and the irregularity in the order of occupation of lots
gives it the same scattered appearance that many other settlements
have. But the abundance of trees, the width of the streets, the
perpetual presence of running water, the frequency and size of the
orchards, and the general appearance of simple, rustic, comfort impart
to Manti all the characteristic charm of the Mormon settlements. The
orthodox grist and saw-mills, essential adjuncts of every outlying
hamlet, find their usual place in the local economy; but to me the
most interesting corner was the quaint tithing-house, a Dutch-barn
kind of place, still surrounded by the high stone stockade which was
built for the protection of the settlers during the Indian troubles
fifteen years ago. Inside the tithing-house were two great bins half
filled with wheat and oats, and a few bundles of wool. I had expected
to find a miscellaneous confusion of articles of all kinds, but on
inquiry discovered that the popular theory of Mormon tithing, "a tenth
of everything,"--"even to the tenth of every egg that is laid," as a
Gentile lady plaintively assured me, is not carried out in practice,
the majority of Mormons allowing their tithings to run into arrears,
and then paying them up in a lump in some one staple article, vegetable
or animal, that happens to be easiest for them. The tenth of their
eggs or their currant jam does not, therefore, as supposed, form part
of the rigid annual tribute of these degraded serfs to their grasping
masters. As a matter of fact, indeed, the payment of tithings is as
nearly voluntary as the collection of a revenue necessary for carrying
on a government can possibly be allowed to be. What it may have been
once, is of no importance now. But to-day, so far from there being
any undue coercion, I have amply assured myself that there is extreme
consideration and indulgence, while the general prosperity of the
territory justifies the leniency that prevails.



CHAPTER XIII.

FROM MANTI TO GLENWOOD.

    Scandinavian Mormons--Danish ol--Among the Orchards at Manti--On
    the way to Conference--Adam and Eve--The protoplasm of a
    settlement--Ham and eggs--At Mayfield--Our teamster's theory of
    the ground-hog--On the way to Glenwood--Volcanic phenomena and
    lizards--A suggestion for improving upon Nature--Primitive Art

"MY hosts at Manti were Danes, and the wife brewed Danish ol." Such
is the entry in my note-book, made, I remember, to remind me to say
that the San Pete settlements are composed in great proportion of
Danes and Scandinavians. These nationalities contribute more largely
than any other--unless Great-Britishers are all called one nation--to
the recruiting of Mormonism, and when they reach Utah maintain their
individuality more conspicuously than any others. The Americans, Welsh,
Scotch, English, Germans, and Swiss, merge very rapidly into one blend,
but the Scandinavian type--and a very fine peasant type it is--is
clearly marked in the settlements where the Hansens and the Jansens,
Petersens, Christiansens, Nielsens, and Sorensens, most do congregate.
By the way, some of these Norse names sound very curiously to the ear.
"Ole Hagg" might be thought to be a nickname rather than anything else,
and Lars Nasquist Brihl at best a joke. Their children are remarkably
pretty, and the women models of thriftiness.

My hostess at Manti was a pattern. She made pies under an inspiration,
and her chicken-pie was a distinct revelation. Her "beer" was certainly
a beverage that a man might deny himself quite cheerfully, but to
eat her preserves was like listening to beautiful parables, and her
cream cheese gave the same gentle pleasure as the singing of thankful
canticles.

In the garden was an arbour overrun with a wild grapevine, and I
took my pen and ink in there to write. All went well for a while. An
amiable cat came and joined me, sitting in a comfortable cushion-sort
of fashion on the corner of my blotting-pad. But while we sat there
writing, the cat and I, there came a humming-bird into the arbour--a
little miracle in feathers, with wings all emeralds and a throat of
ruby. And it sat in the sunlight on a vine-twig that straggled out
across the door, and began to preen its tiny feathers. I stopped
writing to watch the beautiful thing. And so did the cat. For happening
to look down at the table I saw the cat, with a fiendish expression of
face and her eyes intent on the bird, gathering her hind legs together
for a spring. To give the cat a smack on the head, and for the cat to
vanish with an explosion of ill-temper, "was the work of an instant."
The humming-bird flashed out into the garden, and I was left alone to
mop up the ink which the startled cat had spilt. Then I went out and
wandered across the garden, where English flowers, the sweet-william
and columbine, pinks and wallflowers, pansies and iris, were growing,
under the fruit-trees still bunched with blossoms, and out into the
street. Friends asked me if I wasn't going to "the conference," but
I had not the heart to go inside when the world out of doors was so
inviting. There was a cool, green tint in the shade of the orchards,
pleasant with the voices of birds and dreamy with the humming of
bees. There was nobody else about, only children making posies of
apple-blossoms and launching blue boats of iris-petals on the little
roadside streams. Everybody was "at conference," and those that could
not get into the building were grouped outside among the waggons of the
country folk who had come from a distance. These conferences are held
quarterly (so that the lives of the Apostles who preside at them are
virtually spent in travelling) and at them everything is discussed,
whether of spiritual or temporal interest and a general balance struck,
financially and religiously. In character they resemble the ordinary
meetings of the Mormons, being of exactly the same curious admixture
of present farming and future salvation, business advice and pious
exhortation.

Everybody who can do so, attends these meetings; and they fulfil,
therefore, all the purposes of the Oriental mela. Farmers,
stock-raisers, and dealers generally, meet from a distance and talk
over business matters, open negotiations and settle bargains, exchange
opinions and discuss prospects. Their wives and families, such of
them as can get away from their homes, foregather and exchange their
domestic news, while everybody lays in a fresh supply of spiritual
refreshment for the coming three months, and hears the latest word of
the Church as to the Edmunds Bill and Gentile tradesmen. The scene is
as primitive and quaint as can be imagined, for in rural Utah life
is still rough and hearty and simple. To the stranger, the greetings
of family groups, with the strange flavour of the Commonwealth days,
the wonderful Scriptural or apocryphal names, and the old-fashioned
salutation, are full of picturesque interest, while the meetings of
waggons filled with acquaintances from remote corners of the country,
the confusion of European dialects--imagine hearing pure Welsh among
the San Pete sagebrush!--the unconventional cordiality of greeting, are
delightful both in an intellectual and artistic sense.

I have travelled much, and these social touches have always had a charm
for me, let them be the demure reunions of Creoles sous les filaos in
Mauritius; or the French negroes chattering as they go to the baths
in Bourbon; the deep-drinking convivialities of the Planters' Club in
Ceylon; the grinning, prancing, rencontres of Kaffir and Kaffir, or
the stolid collision of Boer waggons on the African veldt; the stately
meeting of camel-riding Beluchis on the sandy put of Khelat; the
jingling ox-drawn ekkas foregathered to "bukh" under the tamarind-trees
of Bengal; the reserved salutations of Hindoos as they squat by the
roadside to discuss the invariable lawsuit and smoke the inevitable
hubble-bubble; the noisy congregation of Somali boatmen before their
huts on the sun-smitten shores of Aden;--what a number of reminiscences
I could string together of social traits in various parts of the
world! And these Mormon peasants, pioneers of the West, these hardy
sons of hardy sires, will be as interesting to me in the future as any
others, and my remembrance of them will be one of admiration for their
unfashionable virtues of industry and temperance, and of gratitude for
their simple courtesy and their cordial hospitality.

As we left Manti behind us, the waggons "coming into conference" got
fewer and fewer, and soon we found ourselves out alone upon the broad
levels of the valley, with nothing to keep us company but a low range
of barren hills that did their best to break the monotony of the
landscape. In places, the ground was white with desperate patches of
"saleratus," the saline efflorescence with which agriculture in this
Territory is for ever at war, and resembling in appearance, taste, and
effects the "reh" of the Gangetic plains. Here, as in India, irrigation
is the only known antidote, and once wash it out of the soil and
get crops growing and the enemy retires. But as soon as cultivation
ceases or irrigation slackens, the white infection creeps over the
ground again, and if undisturbed for a year resumes possession. How
unrelenting Nature is in her conflict with man!

We passed some warm springs a few miles from Manti, but the water
though slightly saline is inodorous, and on the patches which they
water I saw the wild flax growing as if it enjoyed the temperature and
the soil. Then Six-Mile Creek, a pleasant little ravine, crossed by a
rustic bridge, which gives water for a large tract Of land, and so to
Sterling, a settlement as yet in its cradle, and curiously illustrative
of "the beginning of things" in rural Utah. One man and his one wife
up on the hillside doing something to the water, one cock and one hen
pecking together in monogamous sympathy, one dog sitting at the door
of a one-roomed log-hut. Everything was in the Adam and Eve stage
of society, and primeval. So Deucalion and Pyrrha had the earth to
themselves, and the "rooster" stalked before his mate as if he was the
first inventor of posterity. But much of this country is going to come
under the plough in time, for there is water, and in the meantime,
as giving promise of a future with some children in it, there is a
school-house--an instance of forethought which gratified me.

The country now becomes undulating, remaining for the most part a
sterile-looking waste of grease-wood, but having an almost continuous
thread of cultivation running along the centre of the valley which, a
few miles further on, suddenly widens into a great field of several
thousand acres. On the other side of it we found Mayfield.

In Mayfield every one was gone to the Conference except a pretty girl,
left to look after all the children of the village, and who resisted
our entreaties for hospitality with a determination that would have
been more becoming in an uglier person--and an old lady, left under the
protection of a big blind dog and a little bobtailed calf. She received
us with the honest courtesy universal in the Territory, showed us where
to put our horses and where the lucerne was stacked, and apologized to
us for having nothing better than eggs and ham to offer!

Fancy nothing better than eggs and ham! To my mind there is nothing in
all travelling so delightful as these eggs-and-ham interruptions that
do duty for meals. Not only is the viand itself so agreeable, but its
odour when cooking creates an appetite.

What a moral there is here! We have all heard of the beauty of the
lesson that those flowers teach us which give forth their sweetest
fragrance when crushed. But I think the conduct of eggs and ham, that
thus create an appetite in order to increase man's pleasure in their
own consumption, is attended with circumstances of good taste that are
unusually pleasing.

In our hostess's house at Mayfield I saw for the first time the
ordinary floor-covering of the country through which we subsequently
travelled--a "rag-carpet." It is probably common all over the world,
but it was quite new to me. I discussed its composition one day with a
mother and her daughter.

"This streak here is Jimmy's old pants, and that darker one is a
military overcoat. This is daddy's plush vest. This bit of the pattern
is--"

"No, mother, that's your old jacket-back; don't you remember?"--and so
on all through the carpet.

Every stripe in it had an association, and the story of the whole was
pretty nearly the story of their entire lives in the country.

"For it took us seven years to get together just this one strip of
carpet. We folks haven't much, you see, that's fit to tear up."

I like the phrase "fit to tear up," and wonder when, in the opinion of
this frugal people, anything does become suitable for destruction. But
it is hardly destruction after all to turn old clothes into carpets,
and the process is as simple as, in fact is identical with, ordinary
hand-weaving. The cloth is simply shredded into very narrow strips,
and each strip is treated in the loom just as if it were ordinary
yarn, the result being, by a judicious alternation of tints, a very
pleasant-looking and very durable floor-cloth. Rag-rugs are also
made on a foundation of very coarse canvas by drawing very narrow
shreds of rag through the spaces of the canvas, fastening them on the
reverse side, and cutting them off to a uniform "pile" on the upper.
In one cottage at Salina I remember seeing a rug of this kind in which
the girl had drawn her own pattern and worked in the colours with a
distinct appreciation of true artistic effect. An industrial exhibition
for such products would, I have no doubt, bring to light a great many
out-of-the-way handicrafts which these emigrant people have brought
with them from the different parts of Europe, and with which they try
to adorn their simple homes.

Our teamster from Mayfield to Glenwood, the next stage of my southward
journey, was a very cautious person. He would not hurry his horses down
hill--they were "belike" to stumble; and he would not hurry them up
hill--it "fretted" them. On the level intervals he stopped altogether,
to "breathe" them. It transpired eventually that they were plough
horses. I suspected it from the first. And from his driving I suspected
that he was the ploughman. In other respects he was a very desirable
teamster.

His remarks about Europe (he had once been to Chicago himself) were
very entertaining, and his theory of "ground hogs" would have delighted
Darwin. As far as I could follow him, all animals were of one species,
the differences as to size and form being chiefly accidents of age or
sex. This, at any rate, was my induction from his description of the
"ground hog," which he said was a "kind of squirrel--like the prairie
dog!" As he said, there were "quite a few" ground hogs, but they moved
too fast among the brush for me to identify them. As far as I could
tell, though, they were of the marmot kind, about nine inches long,
with very short tails and round small ears. When they were at a safe
distance they would stand up at full length on their hind legs, the
colouring underneath being lighter than on the back. What are they? I
have seen none in Utah except on these volcanic stretches of country
between Salina and Monroe.

Much of Utah is volcanic, but here, beyond Salina, huge mounds of
scoriae, looking like heaps of slag from some gigantic furnace,
are piled up in the centre of the level ground, while in other
places circular depressions in the soil--sometimes fifty feet in
diameter and lowest in the centre, with deep fissures defining the
circumference--seem to mark the places whence the scoriae had been
drawn, and the earth had sunk in upon the cavities thus exhausted.

The two sides of the river (the Sevier) were in striking contrast. On
this, the eastern, was desolation and stone heaps and burnt-up spaces
with ant-hills and lizards.

Nothing makes a place look (to me at least) so hot as an abundance of
lizards. They are associated in memory with dead, still heat, "the
intolerable calor of Mambre," the sun-smitten cinder-heap that men call
Aden, the stifling hillsides of Italy where the grapes lie blistering
in the autumn sun, the desperate suburbs of Alexandria--what millions
of scorched-looking lizards, detestable little salamanders, used to
bask upon Cleopatra's Needles when they lay at full length among the
sand!--the heat-cracked fields of India. I know very well that there
are lizards and lizards; that they might be divided--as the Hindoo
divides everything, whether victuals or men's characters, medicines
or the fates the gods send him--into "hot" and "cold" lizards. The
salamander itself, according to the ancients, was icy cold. But this
does not matter. All lizards make places look hot.

On the other side of the river, a favourite raiding-ground of "Mr.
Indian," as the settlers pleasantly call him, lies Aurora, a settlement
in the centre of a rich tract of red wheat soil with frequent
growths of willow and buffalo-berry (or bull-berry or red-berry or
"kichi-michi") marking the course of the Sevier.

But our road soon wound down by a "dug way" to the bottom-lands, and we
found ourselves on level meadows clumped with shrubs and patched with
corn-fields, and among scattered knots of grazing cattle and horses.
Overhead circled several pairs of black hawks, a befitting reminder to
the dwellers on these Thessalian fields, these Campanian pastures, that
Scythian Piutes and Navajo Attilas might at any time swoop down upon
them.

But the forbearance of the Indian in the matter of beef and mutton
is inexplicable--and most inexplicable of all in the case of lamb,
seeing that mint grows wild. This is a very pleasing illustration of
the happiness of results when man and nature work cordially together.
The lamb gambols about among beds of mint! What a becoming sense of
the fitness of things that would be that should surprise the innocent
thing in its fragrant pasture and serve up the two together! "They were
pleasant in their lives, and in death they were not divided." And what
a delightful field for similar efforts such a spectacle opens up to the
philosophic mind! Here, beyond Aurora, as we wind in and out among the
brakes of willow and rose-bush, we catch glimpses of the river, with
ducks riding placidly at anchor in the shadows of the foliage. And not
a pea in the neighbourhood! Now, why not sow green peas along the banks
of the American rivers and lakes? How soothing to the weary traveller
would be this occasional relief of canard aux petits pois!

After an interval of pretty river scenery we found ourselves once
more in a dismal, volcanic country with bald hills and leprous
sand-patches the only features of the landscape, with lizards for
flowers and an exasperating heat-drizzle blurring the outlines of
everything with its quivering refraction. And then, after a few miles
of this, we are suddenly in the company of really majestic mountains,
some of them cedared to the peaks, others broken up into splendid
architectural designs of almost inconceivable variety, richly tinted
and fantastically grouped. How wealthy this range must be in mineral!
In front of us, above all the intervening hills, loomed out a monster
mountain, and turning one of its spurs we break all at once upon the
village of Glenwood--a beautiful cluster of foliage with skirts of
meadow-land spread out all about it--lying at the foot of the huge
slope.

Near Glenwood is an interesting little lake that I visited. Its water
is exquisitely clear and very slightly warm. Though less than a foot
deep in most places (it has one pool twelve feet in depth), it never
freezes, in spite of the intense cold at this altitude. It is stocked
with trout that do not grow to any size, but which do not on the
other hand seem to diminish in numbers, although the consumption is
considerable. The botany in the neighbourhood of the lake is very
interesting, the larkspur, lupin, mimulus, violet, heart's-ease,
ox-eye, and several other familiar plants of English gardens, growing
wild, while a strongly tropical flavour is given to the vegetation by
the superb footstools of cactus--imagine sixty-one brilliant scarlet
blossoms on a cushion only fifteen inches across!--by the presence of
a gorgeous oriole (the body a pure yellow freaked with black on the
wings, and the head and neck a rich orange), and by a large butterfly
of a clear flame-colour with the upper wings sharply hooked at the
tips. Flower, bird, and insect were all in keeping with the Brazils or
the Malayan Archipelago.

On a rock, close by the grist-mill, is the only specimen of the
much-talked-of Indian "hieroglyphics" that I have seen. They may of
course be hieroglyphics, but to me they look like the first attempts of
some untutored savage youth to delineate in straight lines the human
form divine. Or they may be only his attempts to delineate a cockroach.



CHAPTER XIV.

FROM GLENWOOD TO MONROE.

    From Glenwood to Salina--Deceptiveness of appearances--An apostate
    Mormon's friendly testimony---Reminiscences of the Prophet Joseph
    Smith--Rabbit-hunting in a waggon--Lost in the sagebrush--A day
    at Monroe--Girls riding pillion--The Sunday drum--Waiting for the
    right man: "And what if he is married?"--The truth about apostasy:
    not always voluntary.

SOON after leaving Glenwood, cultivation dies out, and for twelve miles
or so the rabbit-brush and grease-wood--the "atriplex" of disagreeably
scientific travellers, who always speak of sage-brush as "artemisia,"
and disguise the gentle chipmunk as "spermophilus"--divide the land
between them. The few flowers, and these all dwarfed varieties, attest
the poverty of the soil. The mountains, however, do their best to
redeem the landscape, and the scenery, as desolate scenery, is very
fine. The ranges that have on either hand rolled along an unbroken
series of monotonous contour, now break up into every conceivable
variety of form, mimicking architecture or rather multiplying its
types, and piling bluffs, pierced with caves, upon terraces, and
pinnacles upon battlements. Causeways, like that in Echo Canyon, slant
down their slopes, and other vestiges of a terrific aqueous action
abound. Next to this riot of rock comes a long series of low hills,
grey, red, and yellow, utterly destitute of vegetation, and so smooth
that it looks as if the place were a mountain-yard, where Nature
made her mountains, and had collected all her materials about her in
separate convenient mounds before beginning to mix up and fuse. In
places they were richly spangled with mica, giving an appearance of
sparkling, trickling water to the barren slopes.

On the other side of the valley, the mountains, discountenancing such
frivolities, had settled down into solid-bottomed masses of immense
bulk, the largest mountains, in superficial acreage, I had seen all the
journey, and densely cedared.

With Gunnison in sight across the valley, we reached Willow Creek,
a pleasant diversion of water and foliage in the dreary landscape,
and an eventful spot in the last Indian war, for among these willows
here Black Hawk made a stand to dispute the Mormons' pursuit of their
plundered stock, and held the creek, too, all the day. And so out on to
the monotonous grease-wood levels again--an Indians' camp fire among
the cedars, the only sign of a living thing--and over another "divide,"
and so into the Sevier Valley. The river is seen flowing along the
central depression, with the Red-Mound settlement on the other side of
the stream, and Salina on this side of it, lying on ahead.

Salina is one of those places it is very hard to catch. You see it
first "about seven" miles off, and after travelling towards it for
an hour and a half, find you have still "eight miles or so" to go.
"Appearances are very deceptive in this country," as these people
delight in saying to new-comers, and the following story is punctually
told, at every opportunity, to illustrate it.

A couple of Britishers (of course "Britishers") started off from their
hotel "to walk over to that mountain there," just to get an appetite
for breakfast. About dinner-time one of them gave up and came back,
leaving his obstinate friend to hunt the mountain by himself. After
dining, however, he took a couple of horses and rode out after his
friend, and towards evening came up with him just as he was taking off
his shoes and stockings by the side of a two-foot ditch.

"Hallo!" said the horseman, "what on earth are you doing, Jack?"

"Doing!" replied the other sulkily. "Can't you see? I am taking off my
boots to wade this infernal river."

"River!" exclaimed his friend; "what river? That thing's only a
two-foot ditch!"

"Daresay," was the dogged response. "It looks only a two-foot ditch.
But you can't trust anything in this beastly country. Appearances are
so deceptive."

But we caught Salina at last, for we managed to head it up into a
cul-de-sac of the mountains, and overtook it about sundown. A few
years ago the settlement was depopulated; for Black Hawk made a swoop
at it from his eyrie among the cedars on the overlooking hill, and
after killing a few of the people, compelled the survivors to fly
northward, where the militia was mustering for the defence of the
valley. It was in this war that the Federal officer commanding the post
at Salt Lake City, acting under the orders of General Sherman, refused
to help the settlers, telling them in a telegram of twenty words to
help themselves. The country, therefore, remembers with considerable
bitterness that three years' campaign against a most formidable
combination of Indians; when they lost so many lives, when two counties
had to be entirely abandoned, many scattered settlements broken up, and
an immense loss in property and stock suffered.

At Salina I met an apostate Mormon who had deserted the religion
because he had grown to disbelieve in it, but who had retained,
nevertheless, all his respect for the leaders of the Church and the
general body of Mormons. He is still a polygamist; that is to say,
having married two wives, he has continued to treat them honourably
as wives. With me was an apostle, one of the most deservedly popular
elders of the Church, and it was capital entertainment to hear the
apostate and the apostle exchanging their jokes at each other's
expense. I was shown at this house, by the way, an emigration loan
receipt. The emigrant, his wife, and three children, had been brought
out in the old waggon days at $50 a head. Some fifteen years later,
when the man had become well-to-do and after he had apostatized, he
repaid the $250, and some $50 extra as "interest." The loan ticket
stipulated for "ten per cent per annum," but as he said, it was "only
Mormons who would have let him run on so long, and then have let him
off so much of the interest."

My host was himself an interesting man, for he had been with the
Saints ever since the stormy days of Kirtland, and had known Joseph
Smith personally. "Ah, sir, he was a noble man!" said the old fellow.
Among other out-of-the-way items which he told me about the founder
of the faith, was his predilection for athletic exercises and games
of all kinds; how he used to challenge strangers to wrestle, and be
very wroth when, as happened once, the stranger threw him over the
counter of a shop; and how he used to play baseball with the boys in
the streets of Nauvoo. This trait of Joseph Smith's character I have
never seen noticed by his biographers, but it is quite noteworthy, as
also, I think, is the extraordinary fascination which his personal
appearance--for he was a very handsome man of the Sir Robert Peel
type--seems to have exercised over his contemporaries. When speaking to
them, I find that one and all will glance from the other aspects of his
life to this--that he was "a noble man."

Rabbit-hunting across country in a two-horse waggon is not a sport
I shall often indulge in again. The rabbit has things too much its
own way. It does not seem to be a suitable animal for pursuing in a
vehicle. It is too evasive.

Indeed, but for an accident, I should probably never have indulged in
it at all. But it happened that on our way from Salina to Monroe we
lost our way. Our teamster, for inscrutable reasons of his own, turned
off from the main road into a bye-track, which proved to have been made
by some one prospecting for clay, and the hole which he had excavated
was its terminus. I tried to think out his reason for choosing this
particular road, the least and most unpromising of the three that
offered themselves to him. It was probably this. Two out of the three
roads, being wrong ones, were evils. One of these was larger than the
other, and so of the two evils he chose the less. Q.E.D.

To get back into the road we struck across the sage-brush, and in so
doing started a jack-rabbit. As it ran in the direction we wanted to
go, we naturally followed it. But the jack-rabbit thought we were in
murderous pursuit, and performed prodigies of agility and strategy in
order to escape us. But the one thing that it ought to have done, got
out of our road, it did not do. We did not gain on the lively animal,
I confess, for it was all we could do to retain our seats, but we gave
it enough to prose about all the days of its life. What stories the
younger generation of jack-rabbits will hear of "the old days" when
desperate men used to come out thousands of miles in two-horse waggons
with canvas hoods to try and catch their ancestors! And what a hero
that particular jack-rabbit which we did not hunt will be!

The road southwards leads along hillsides, both up and down, but on the
whole gradually ascending, till the summit of the spur is reached. Here
one of the most enchanting landscapes possible is suddenly found spread
out beneath you. A vast expanse of green meadow-land with pools Of blue
water here and there, herds of horses grazing, flocks of wild fowl in
the air, and on the right the settlement of Richfield among its trees
and red-soiled corn-fields!

Crossing this we found that a spur, running down on it, divides it
really into two, or rather conceals a second plain from sight. But
in the second, sage-brush, "the damnable absinthe," that standard of
desolation, waves rampant, and the telegraph wire that goes straddling
across it seems as if it must have been laid solely for the convenience
of larks. Every post has its lark, as punctually as its insulator, and
every lark lets off its three delicious notes of song as we go by, just
as if the birds were sentries passing on a "friend" from picket to
picket. And here it was that we adventured with the jack-rabbit, much
to our own discomfiture. But while we were casting about for our lost
road, we came upon a desolate little building, all alone in the middle
of the waste, which we had supposed to be a deserted ranch-house, and
were surprised to find several waggons standing about. Just as we
reached it, the owners of the waggons came out, and then we discovered
that it was the "meeting-house" for the scattered ranches round, and
seeing the several parties packing themselves into the different
waggons remembered (from a certain Sabbatical smartness of apparel)
that it was Sunday. We were soon on our right road again, and passing
the hamlets of Inverary and Elsinore on the right, came in sight of
Monroe, and through a long prelude of cultivation reached that quaint
little village just apparently at the fashionable hour for girls to go
out riding with their beaux.

Couple after couple passed us, the girls riding pillion behind their
sweethearts, and very well contented they all seemed to be, with their
arms round the object of their affections. Except in France once or
twice, I do not recollect ever having seen this picturesque old custom
in practice; but judging from the superior placidity of his countenance
and the merriment on hers, I should say it was an enjoyable one, and
perhaps worth reviving.

Another interesting feature of Sunday evening in Monroe was the big
drum. It appeared that the arrival of the Apostle who was with me had
been expected, and that the people, who are everywhere most curiously
on the alert for spiritual refreshment, had agreed that if the Apostle
on arriving felt equal to holding a meeting, the big drum was to be
beaten. In due course, therefore, a very little man disappeared inside
a building and shortly reappeared in custody of a very big drum, which
he proceeded to thump in a becoming Sabbatical manner. But whether the
drum or the association of old band days overcame him, or whether the
devil entered into him or into the drum, it is certain that he soon
drifted into a funereal rendering of "Yankee Doodle." He was conscious,
moreover, of his lapse into weekday profanity, and seemed to struggle
against it by beating ponderous spondees. But it was of no use. Either
the drum or the devil was too big for him, and the solemn measure
kept breaking into patriotic but frivolous trochaics. Attracted by
these proceedings, the youth of the neighbourhood had collected, and
their intelligent aversion to monopolists was soon apparent by their
detaching the little barnacle from his drum and subjecting the resonant
instrument to a most irregular bastinado. They all had a go at it, both
drumsticks at once, and the result was of a very unusual character,
as neither of the performers could hear distinctly what was going
on on the other side of the drum, and each, therefore, worked quite
independently. In the meanwhile some one had procured a concertina,
and this, with a dog that had a fine falsetto bark, constituted a very
respectable "band" in point of noise. Thus equipped, the lads started
off to beat up the village, and working with that enthusiasm which
characterizes the self-imposed missions of youth, were very successful.
Everybody came out to their doors to see what was going on, and having
got so far, they then went on to the meeting. By twos and threes and
occasional tens the whole village collected inside the meeting-house,
or round the door unable to get in, and I must confess that looking
round the room, I was surprised at the number of pretty peasant faces
that Monroe can muster.

And here for the first time I became aware of a very significant fact,
and one that well deserves notice, though I have never heard or seen
it referred to--I mean the number of handsome marriageable girls who
are unmarried in the Mormon settlements. Omitting other places, in each
of which many well-grown, comely girls can be found unmarried, I saw
in the hamlet of Monroe enough unwedded charms to make me think that
either the resident polygamist had very bad taste or very bad luck. My
host, a Mormon, was a widower (a complete widower I mean), and two very
pretty girls, neighbours, looked after his household affairs for him.
One was a blonde Scandinavian of Utah birth; the other a dark-haired
Scotch lassie emigrated three years ago--and each was just eighteen.
(And in the Western country eighteen looks three-and-twenty.) I asked
my host why he did not marry one of them, or both, and he told me that
he had a family growing up, and that he had so often seen quarrels and
separations result from the remarriage of fathers that he did not care
to risk it.

And the Apostle, who was present, said, "Quite right."

Now please remember this was in polygamous Utah, in a secluded village,
entirely Mormon, where, if anywhere, men and women might surely do as
they pleased. In any monogamous society such a reason, followed by the
approval of a Church dignitary, would not be worth commenting on, but
here among Mormons it was significant enough.

I spoke to the girls, and asked them why they had not married.

"Because the right man has not come along yet," said one.

"But perhaps when the right man does come along he will be married
already," I said.

"And why should that make any difference?" was the reply.

In the meantime each of these shapely daughters of Eve had a "beau" who
took her out riding behind him, escorted her home from meeting, and so
forth. But neither of them had found "the right man."

Of Monroe, therefore, one of those very places, retired from
civilization, "where the polygamous Mormon can carry on his beastly
practices undetected, and therefore unpunished"--as the scandalous
clique of Salt Lake City (utterly ignorant of Mormonism except what it
can pick up from apostates) is so fond of alleging--I can positively
state from personal knowledge that there are both men and women there
who are guided in matters of marriage by the very same motives and
principles that regulate the relation in monogamous society. Further, I
can positively state the same of several other settlements, and judging
from these, and from Salt Lake City, I can assure my readers that the
standard of public morality among the Mormons of Utah is such as the
Gentiles among them are either unable or unwilling to live up to.

In this connexion it is worth noting that public morality has in Utah
one safeguard, over and above all those of other countries, namely, the
strict surveillance of the Church. I have enjoyed while in Utah such
exceptional advantages for arriving at the truth, as both Gentiles and
Mormons say have never been extended to any former writer, and among
other facts with which I have become acquainted is the silent scrutiny
into personal character which the Church maintains.

Profanity, intemperance, immorality, and backbiting are taken quiet
note of, and if persisted in against advice, are punished by a gradual
withdrawal of "fellowship;" and result in what the Gentiles call
"apostasy." Among the standing instructions of the teachers of the
wards is this:--

"If persons professing to be members of the Church be guilty of
allowing drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, profanity, defrauding or
backbiting, or any other kind of wickedness or unrighteous dealing,
they should be visited and their wrong-doing pointed out to them in the
spirit of brotherly kindness and meekness, and be exhorted to repent."

If they do not repent, they find the respect, then the friendship, and
finally the association, of their co-religionists withheld from them,
and thus tacitly ostracized by their own Church, they "apostatize" and
carry their vices into the Gentile camp, and there assist to vilify
those who have already pronounced them unfit to live with honest men or
virtuous women.



CHAPTER XV.

AT MONROE.

    "Schooling" in the Mormon districts--Innocence as to whisky,
    but connoisseurs in water--"What do you think of that water,
    sir?"--Gentile dependents on Mormon charity--The one-eyed
    rooster--Notice to All!

SITTING at the door next morning, I saw a very trimly-dressed damsel
of twenty or thereabouts, coming briskly along under the trees, which
there, as in every other Mormon settlement, shade the side-walk. She
was the schoolmistress, I learned, and very soon her scholars began
to pass along. I had thus an opportunity of observing the curious,
happy-go-lucky style in which "schooling" is carried on, and I was
sorry to see it, for Mormonism stands urgently in need of more
education, and it is pure folly to spend half the revenue of the
Territory annually in a school establishment, if the children and
their parents are permitted to suppose that education is voluntary
and a matter of individual whim. Some of the leading members of the
Church are conspicuous defaulters in this matter, and do their families
a gross wrong by setting "the chores" and education before them as
being of equal importance. Even in the highest class of the community
children go to school or stay away almost as they like, and provided a
little boy or girl has the shrewdness to see that he or she can relieve
the father or mother from trouble by being at home to run errands and
do little jobs about the house, they can, I regret to think, regulate
the amount of their own schooling as they please. I know very well
that Utah compares very favourably, on paper, with the greater part
of America, but I have compiled and examined too many educational
statistics in my time to have any faith in them.

But in the matter of abstinence from strong drink and stimulants, the
leaders of the Church set an admirable example, and I found it very
difficult most of the time, and quite impossible part of it, to keep my
whisky flask replenished.

My system of arriving at the truth as to the existence of spirit stores
in any particular settlement, was to grumble and complain at having
no whisky, and to exaggerate my regrets at the absence of beer. The
courtesy of my hosts was thus challenged, and of the sincerity of the
efforts made to gratify my barbaric tastes, I could have no doubt
whatever. In most cases they were quite ignorant of even the cost
of liquor, and on one occasion a man started off with a five-dollar
piece I had given him to get me "five dollars' worth of whisky in this
bottle," pointing to my flask. I explained to him that I only wanted
the flask replenished, and that there would be change to bring back. He
did not get any at all, however.

On one occasion the Bishop brought in, in evident triumph, two bottles
of beer. On another I went clandestinely with a Mormon, after dark, and
drank some whisky "as a friend," and not as a customer, with another
Mormon, who "generally kept a bottle on hand" for secret consumption.
That they would both have been ashamed for their neighbours to know
what they were about, I am perfectly convinced. On a third occasion an
official brought me half a pint of whisky, and the price was a dollar.

Now it is quite impossible for me, who have thus made personal
experiment, to have any doubt as to the prevailing sobriety of these
people. I put them repeatedly to the severest test that you can
apply to a hospitable man, by asking point-blank for ardent spirits.
Sometimes, in an off-hand way, I would give money and the flask to a
lad, and ask him to "run across to the store and get me a little whisky
or brandy." He would take both and meander round in an aimless sort of
way. But I might almost as well have asked him to go and buy me a few
birds-of-paradise or advance sheets of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica."
The father or a neighbour might perhaps suggest a "likely" place to get
some stimulant, but, as a rule, the quest was unconditionally abandoned
as hopeless.

The Elders of the Church set a strict example themselves, discouraging,
by their own abstinence, indulgence even in tea and coffee. You are
asked in a settlement whether you will have tea or coffee, just as in
England you would be asked whether you would drink ale or claret. A
strong man takes a cup of tea as a lady in Europe might take a glass of
sherry, as justified by unusual exercise and fatigue. Being a Londoner,
I entertain a most wholesome suspicion of water as a drink, and I
reverence fresh milk. In rural Utah, milk being so abundant, the people
think little of it, but they pride themselves on their water.

"What do you think of that water, sir?" was a question that puzzled me
to answer at first, for I am not a connoisseur in drinking-water. If
it had been a claret, I might have made a pretence of criticism. But
water! Or if they had let me wash in it, I would have told them whether
I thought it "hard" or "soft." But to pass an opinion on a particular
tumbler of water, as if it were a special brand laid down by my host
for his own drinking, completely puzzled me. I can no more tell waters
apart than I can tell Chinamen. Of course I can discriminate between
the outcome of the sea and of sulphur springs. But for the rest, it
seems to me that they only differ in their degrees of cleanliness, or,
as scientific men say, to "the properties which they hold in solution,"
that is mud. And mud, I take it, is always pretty much the same.

So at first when my host would suddenly turn to me with, "What do you
think of that water, sir?" I made the mistake of supposing it might be
one of the extraordinary aqueous novelties for which this territory
is so remarkable--hot-geyser water or petrifying water, or something
else of the kind--and would smack my lips critically and venture on a
suggestion of "lime," or "soda," or "alkali." But my host was always
certain to be down with, "Oh, no; I assure you. That is reckoned the
best water in the county!"

I soon discovered, however, that the right thing to say was that I
preferred it, "on the whole," to the water at the last place. This was
invariably satisfactory--unless, of course, there was a resident of
"the last place" present, when an argument would ensue. These people,
in fact, look upon their drinking-water just as on the continent they
look upon their vins ordinaires, or in England upon their local brews,
and to the last I could not help being delighted at the manner in
which a jug of water and tumblers were handed about among a party of
fatigued and thirsty travellers. I always took my share becomingly, but
sometimes, I must confess, with silent forebodings.

For in some places there are springs which petrify, by coating with
lime, any substance they flow over, and I did not anticipate with any
gratification having my throat lined with cement, or my stomach faced
with building-stone.

"Who are those children?" said I to my host at Munroe, pointing to
two ragged little shoeless waifs that were standing in his yard and
evidently waiting to be taken notice of. Instead of replying, my host
turned towards them.

"Well, Jimmy," said he, "what is it to-day?"

The wistful eyes looking out from under the tattered, broad-brimmed
hats, brightened into intelligence.

"Another chicken for mother," said both together, promptly; and then,
as if suddenly overtaken by a sense of their audacity, the forlorn
little lads dropped their eyes and stood there, holding each other's
hands, as picturesque and pathetic a pair as any beggar children in
Italy. In the full sunlight, but half shaded by the immense brims of
those wonderfully ancient hats, the urchins were irresistibly artistic,
and if met with anywhere in the Riviera, would have been sure of that
small-change tribute which the romantic tourist pays with such pleasant
punctuality to the picturesque poverty of Southern childhood. But this
was in Utah.

And my host looked at them from under his tilted straw hat. They stood
in front of him as still as sculptors' models, but fingers and toes
kept exchanging little signals of nervous distress.

"All right. Go and get one," said my host suddenly. "Take the young
rooster that's blind of one eye."

He had to shout the last instructions in a rapid crescendo as the
youngsters had sprung off together at the word "go," like twin shafts
from those double-arrowed bows of the old Manchurian archers. Three
minutes later and a most woful scrawking heralded the approach of
the captors and the captive. The young rooster, though blind of one
eye, saw quite enough of the situation to make him apprehensive, but
the younger urchin had him tight under his arm, and, still under the
exciting influences of the chase and capture, the boys stood once more
before my host, with panting bodies, flushed cheeks, and tufts of
yellow hair sprouting out through crevices of those wondrous old hats,
which had evidently just seen service in the capture. And the rooster,
feeling, perhaps, that he was now before the final court of appeal,
scrawked as if machinery had got loose inside him and he couldn't stop
it.

"How's your (scraw-w-w-k) mother?"

She's (scraw-w-w-k)--and she's (scraw-w-w-k) nothing to eat all
yesterday." (Scraw-w-k.)

"Go on home, then."

And away down the middle of the road scudded the little fellows in a
confusion of dust and scrawk.

"Who are those children?" I asked again, thinking I had chanced on that
unknown thing, a pauper Mormon.

"Oh," said my host, "he's a bad lot--an outsider--who came in here as a
loafer, and deserted his wife. She's very ill and pretty nigh starving.
Ay, she would starve, too, if her boys there didn't come round regular,
begging of us. But loafers know very well that 'those----Mormons' won't
let anybody go hungry. Ay, and they act as if they knew it, too."

In other settlements there are exactly such similar cases, but I would
draw the attention of my readers--I wish I could draw the attention
of the whole nation to it--to the following notice which stands to
this day with all the force of a regular by-law in these Mormon
settlements:--

    "NOTICE TO ALL.

    "If there are any persons in this city who are destitute of food,
    let them be who they may, if they will let their wants be known to
    me, privately or otherwise, I will see that they are furnished with
    food and lodging until they can provide for themselves. The bishops
    of every ward are to see that there are no persons going hungry.

    "(Signed by the Presiding Bishop.)"

Now it may be mere "sentiment" on my part, but I confess that this
"Notice to All," in the simplicity of its wording, in the nobility of
its spirit, reads to me very beautifully. And what a contrast to turn
from this text of a universal charity, that is no respecter of persons,
to the infinite meanness of those who can write, as in the Salt Lake
Tribune, of the whole community of Mormons as the villainous spawn of
polygamy!"

It is a recognized law among the Mormons that no tramp shall pass by
one of their settlements hungry; if it is at nightfall, he is to be
housed. Towards the Indians their policy is one of enlightened and
Christian humanity. For their own people their charity commences from
the first. Emigrated to this country by the voluntary donations which
maintain the "Perpetual Emigration Fund," each new arrival is met
with immediate care, and being passed on to his location, finds (as
I have described in another chapter) a system of mutual kindliness
prevailing which starts him in life. If sick, he is cared for. If he
dies, his family is provided for. All this is fact. I have read it in
no books, heard it from no hoodwinking elders. My informants are lads
just arrived in Salt Lake City--within an hour or two of their arrival,
in fact; young men just settling down in their first log hut in rural
settlements: grown men now themselves engaged in the neighbourly duty
of assisting new-comers.

I have met and talked to those men--Germans, Scandinavians,
Britishers--in their own homes here in Utah, and have positively
assured myself of the fact I state, that charity, unquestioning,
simple-hearted charity, is one of the secrets of the strength of this
wonderful fabric of Mormonism. The Mormons are, more nearly than any
other community in the world on such a scale, one family. Every man
knows all the rest of his neighbours with an intimacy and a neighbourly
interest that is the result of reciprocal good services in the past.
This is their bond of union. In India there is "the village community"
which moves, though in another arc, on the same plane as the Mormon
settlement system. There, to touch one man's crop is to inflame the
whole clan with the sense of a common injury. Here it is much the same.
And as it is between the different individuals in a settlement, so it
is between the different settlements in the territory. A brutal act,
like that eviction of the Mormon postmaster at Park City the other
day, disturbs the whole of Mormonism with apprehensions of impending
violence. A libel directed at a man or woman in Salt Lake City makes a
hundred thousand personal enemies in Utah. Now, with what petard will
you hoist such a rock?

Induce these Mormons to hate one another "for all the world like
Christians," as George Eliot said, and they can be snapped as easily
as the philosopher's faggots when once they were unbundled. But in
the meantime abuse of individuals or "persecution" of a class simply
cements the whole body together more firmly than ever. Mutual charity
is one of the bonds of Mormon union. It is the secret of this "oneness"
which makes the Salt Lake Tribune yelp so.



CHAPTER XVI.

JACOB HAMBLIN.

    A Mormon missionary among the Indians--The story of Jacob Hamblin's
    life--His spiritualism, the result of an intense faith--His good
    work among the Lamanites--His belief in his own miracles.

LEAVING Munroe, we find cultivation gradually disappearing, and, after
two or three miles, unmitigated brush supervenes. A steep divide now
thrusts itself across the road, and, traversing near the summit a
patch of pebbly ground which seemed a very paradise for botanists, we
descend again into a wilderness of grease-wood, "the unspeakable Turk"
among vegetables. The mountains between which we pass provide, however,
a succession of fine views. They are of that bulky, broad-based and
slowly sloping type that is so much more solemn and impressive than
jagged, sharp-pointed and precipitous formations.

A few miles more bring us to one of them, and for the first time during
the journey our road runs through the thickly growing "cedars" which we
have hitherto seen only at a distance lying like dark clouds upon the
hill-sides and black drifts in the gulches. The wild flowers growing
under these "cedars" (and the pines which are sprinkled among them) are
of new varieties to me, and I enjoyed a five-mile walk in this novel
vegetation immensely. A few years ago, though, "Mr. Indian" would have
made himself too interesting to travellers for men to go wandering
about among the cedars picking posies. They would have found those
"arrows tipped with jasper," which are so picturesque in Hiawatha,
flying about instead of humming-birds tipped with emerald, and a
tomahawk hurtling through the bushes would have been more likely to
excite remark than the blue magpies which I saw looking after snails.

This district was, until very recently, a favourite hunting-ground of
those Indians of whom old Jacob Hamblin was the Nestor--the guide,
philosopher, friend, and victim. One day they would try "to fill his
skin full of arrows;" on the next day they would be round him, asking
him to make rain-medicine. They would talk Mormonism with him all day,
and grunt approvingly; as soon as night fell they would steal his
horse. He was always patching up peace between this tribe and that, yet
every now and then they would catch him, have a great pow-wow over him,
and being unable to decide whether he should be simply flayed or be
roasted first over a charcoal fire, would let him go, with provisions
and an escort for his home journey.

His life, indeed, was so wonderful--much more fascinating than any
fiction--that I am not surprised at his believing, as he does, that
he is under the special protection of Heaven, and, as he says, in a
private covenant with the Almighty that "if he does not thirst for
the blood of the Lamanites, his blood shall never be shed by them."
He began life as a farmer near Chicago, but being baptized received
at once "the immediate gift of the Holy Ghost," and at once entered
upon a career of "miracles" and "prophecies" that when told in serious
earnest are sufficient to stagger even Madame Blavatsky herself. He
cured his neighbours of deadly ailments by the laying on of hands, and
foretold conversions, deaths, and other events with unvarying accuracy.
By prolonged private meditation he enjoyed what, from his description,
must be a pregustation of the Buddhistic Nirvana, and after this,
miracles became quite commonplace with him. He witnessed the "miracle"
of the great quail flights into the camp of the fugitive and starving
Saints in 1846, and helped to collect the birds and to eat them; he saw
also the "miraculous" flights of seagulls that rescued the Mormons from
starvation by destroying the locusts in 1848.

But his personal experiences, narrated with a simplicity of speech and
unquestioning confidence that are bewildering, were really marvellous.
If cattle were lost, he could always dream where they were. If sickness
prevailed, he knew beforehand who would suffer, and which of them would
die, and which of them recover. If Indians were about, angels gave
him in his sleep the first warnings of his danger. His sympathy with
the Indians was, however, very early awakened, and being strengthened
in it by the conciliatory Indian policy of Brigham Young, he became
before long the only recognized medium of friendly communication with
them. Everybody, whether Federal officials, California emigrants,
Mormon missionaries, or Indians themselves, enlisted his influence
whenever trouble with the tribes was anticipated. His own explanation
of this influence is remarkable enough. As a young man, he says, he was
sometimes told off to join retributive expeditions, but he could never
bring himself to fire at an Indian, and on one occasion, when he did
try to do so, his rifle kept missing fire, while "the Lamanites," with
equally ineffectual efforts to shed his blood, kept on pincushioning
the ground all around him with their futile arrows. After this he and
the Indians whenever they met, spared each other's lives with punctual
reciprocity.

On one occasion he dreamed that he was walking in a friendly manner
with some of the members of a certain tribe, when he picked up a piece
of a shining substance, which stuck to his fingers. The more he tried
to rub it off the brighter it became. One would naturally, under such
circumstances, anticipate the revelation of a gold-mine, but Jacob
Hamblin, without any questioning, went off at once to the tribe in
question. They received him as friends, and he stayed with them. One
day, passing a lodge, "the Spirit" whispered to him, "Here is the
shining substance you saw in your dream." But all he saw was a squaw
and a boy papoose. However, he went up to the squaw, and asked for the
boy. She naturally demurred to the request, but to her astonishment the
boy, gathering up his bow and arrows, urged compliance with it, and
Hamblin eventually led off his dream-revealed "lump." After a while he
asked the boy how it was he was so eager to come, though he had never
seen a white man before, and the boy answered, "My Spirit told me that
you were coming to my father's lodge for me on a certain day, and that
I was to go with you, and when the day came I went out to the edge
of the wood, and lit a fire to show you the way to me." And Hamblin
then remembered that it was the smoke of a fire that had led him to
that particular camp, instead of another towards which he had intended
riding!

By way of a parenthesis, let me remark here that if there are any
"Spiritualists" among my readers, they should study Mormonism. The
Saints have long ago formulated into accepted doctrines those mysteries
of the occult world which Spiritualists outside the faith are still
investigating. Your "problems" are their axioms.

This Indian boy became a staunch Mormon, and to the last was in
communion with the other world. Remember I am quoting Hamblin's words,
not in any way endorsing them. In 1863 he was at St. George, and one
day when his friends were starting on a mission to a neighbouring
tribe, he took farewell of them "for ever." "I am going on a mission,
too," he said. "What do you mean?" asked Hamblin. "Only that I shall be
dead before you come back," was the Indian's reply. "I have seen myself
in a dream preaching the gospel to a multitude of my people, and my
ancestors were among them. So I know that I must be a spirit too before
I can carry the Word to spirits." In six weeks Hamblin returned to St.
George; and the Indian was dead.

Brigham Young, as I have said, insisted upon a conciliatory policy
towards the Indians. He made in person repeated visits to the missions
at work among them, and was never weary of advising and encouraging.
Here is a portion of one of his letters: does it read like the
words of a thoroughly bad man?--"Seek by words of righteousness to
obtain the love and confidence of the tribes. Omit promises where
you are not sure you can fulfil them. Seek to unite your hearts in
the bonds of love. . . . May the Spirit of the Lord direct you, and
that He may qualify you for every duty is the constant prayer of your
fellow-labourer in the gospel of salvation, Brigham Young." Here
is a part of another letter: "I trust that the genial and salutary
influences now so rapidly extending to the various tribes, may continue
till it reaches every son and daughter of Abraham in their fallen
condition. The hour of their redemption draws nigh, and the time is not
far off when they shall become a people whom the Lord will bless. . . .
The Indians should be encouraged to keep and take care of stock. I
highly apprcNe your design in doing your farming through the natives;
it teaches them to obtain a subsistence by their own industry, and
leaves you more liberty to extend your labours among others. . . .
You should always be careful to impress upon them that they should
not infringe on the rights of others, and our brethren should be very
careful not to infringe upon their rights in any particular, thus
cultivating honour and good principles in their midst by example as
well as by precept. As ever, your brother in the gospel of salvation,
Brigham Young."

These and other letters are exactly in the spirit of the correspondence
which, in the early days of England in Hindostan, won for the old
Court of Directors the eternal admiration of mankind and for England
the respect of Asia. Yet in Brigham Young's case is it ever carried
to his credit that he spent so much thought and time and labour over
the reclamation of the Indians, by a policy of kindness, and their
exaltation by an example of honourable dealing?

It was in this spirit that the Mormon missionaries went out to
the Indians then living in the part of the Territory over which I
travelled, and Jacob Hamblin was one eminently characteristic of the
type. Beyond all others, however, he sympathized with the red man's
nature. "I argue with him just as he argues," he said. He was on
good terms with the medicine-men, and took a delightful interest in
their ceremonies. But when they failed to bring rain with bonfires
and howling, he used to pray down abundant showers; when they gave up
tormenting the sick as past all hope, Hamblin restored the invalid to
life by the laying on of hands!

Once more let me say that I am only quoting, not indorsing. But I
do him a great injustice in not being able to convey in writing the
impressive simplicity of his language, his low, measured tones,
his contemplative, earnest attitude, his Indian-like gravity of
countenance. That he speaks the implicit truth, according to his own
belief, I am as certain as that the water of the Great Salt Lake is
salt.

His "occult" sympathies seemed at times to be magnetic, for when in
doubt as to whom to choose for his companion on a perilous journey,
some brother or other, the fittest person for the occasion, would
always feel mysteriously influenced to go to him to see if his services
were needed. His displeasure killed men, that is to say they went from
his presence, sickened and died. So frequent was this inexplicable
demise that the Indians worked out a superstition that evil befalls
those who rob or kill a Mormon; and so marked were the special
manifestations of the missionaries' spirit power, that, as Hamblin
says, "the Indians were without excuse for refusing conversion," and
were converted. "They looked to us for counsel, and learned to regard
our words as law." Though the missionaries were sometimes alone, and
the tribes around them of the most desperate kind, as "plundersome" as
wolves and at perpetual blood-feud with each other, the Mormons' lives
were quite safe. When they had determined on an atrocity--burning a
squaw, for instance--they would do it in the most nervous hurry, lest
a Mormon should come along and stop it, and when they had done it and
were reproached, they used to cry like children, and say they were only
Indians.

Tragedy and comedy went hand in hand; laughter at the ludicrous is cut
short by a shudder of horror. "We cannot be good; we must be Piutes.
Perhaps some of our children will be good. We're going off to kill
so-and-so. Whoop!" And away they would go, putting an arrow into the
missionary's horse as they passed. By-and-by the man who shot the arrow
would be found dead, killed by a Mormon's curse, and the rest would
be back at work in the settlement hoeing pumpkins--"for all the world
like Christians!" Through all these alternations of temper and fortune,
Jacob Hamblin retained his tender sympathy with the red men.

Their superstitious piety which, quaintly enough, he does not seem
to think is exactly like his own, attracted him. He found among
them tribes asking the blessing of the Great Father on their food
before they ate it; invoking the Divine protection on behalf of their
visitors; praying for protection when about to cross a river; returning
thanks for a safe return from a journey; always sending one of their
religious men to accompany any party about to travel, and so on. All
this the pious Mormon naturally respected. But over and above these
more ordinary expressions of piety, he found tribes that believed in
and acted upon dreams; that accepted the guidance of "second sight;"
that relied upon prayer for obtaining temporal necessaries; that lived
"by faith," and were awaiting the fulfilment of prophecy. In all this
the Mormon missionary sees nothing but common sense. For instance,
Hamblin said, "I know that some people do not believe in dreams and
night-visions. I myself do not believe in them when they arise from a
disordered stomach, but in other kinds I have been forewarned of coming
events, and received much instruction!" And, in the spirit of these
words, he thinks it the most natural thing in the world that Indians
should start off after a dream and find their lost cattle; suddenly
alter their course in a waterless journey, and come upon hitherto
unknown springs; predict the most impossible meetings with friends,
and avoid dangers that were not even anticipated. In the most serious
manner possible, he acquiesces in the Indians' theory of rain-getting,
and acts upon their clairvoyant advice. "The Lord," he says, "is
mindful of the prayers of these poor barbarians, and answers them with
the blessings they need." Seeing them quite sincere in their faith, he
joins them in their ceremonies of scattering consecrated meal to ensure
protection on a journey, believing himself that simple reliance on
Providence is all that men of honest lives need.

One tribe has a tradition that three prophets are to come to lead them
back to the lands that their fathers once possessed, that these are to
be preceded by good white men, but that the Indians are not to go with
them until after the three prophets have reappeared and told them what
to do. The Indians accept the Mormons as "the good white men" of the
tradition, but "the three prophets" not having reappeared, they refuse
to leave their villages (as the Mormons have wanted them to do), and
Hamblin has not a word to say against such "reasonable" objections.

Is it not wonderful to find men thus reverting to an intellectual
type that the world had supposed to be extinct? to find men, shrewd
in business, honest in every phase of temporal life, going back to
cheiromancy and hydromancy, and transacting temporal affairs at the
guidance of visions? An Indian prays for rain on his pumpkins, in
apparently the most unreasonable way, but the Mormon postpones his
departure till the rain that results is over. On his way he nearly
dies of thirst, prays for deliverance, and in half an hour snow falls
over a mile and a half of ground, melts and forms pools of water! What
are we to say of men who say such things as these? Are they all crazy
together? And what shall we think of the thousands here who believe
that miracles are the most ordinary, reasonable, natural, every-day
phenomena of a life of faith, and quote point-blank the promises of the
New Testament as a sufficient explanation? The best thing, perhaps, is
to say Hum meditatively, and think no more about it.



CHAPTER XVII.

THROUGH MARYSVALE TO KINGSTON.

    Piute Count---Days of small things--A swop in the sage-brush; two
    Bishops for one Apostle--The Kings Of Kingston--A failure in Family
    Communism.

FROM the brow of the cedared hill south of Munroe a splendid view
is obtained, and Piute County opens with fair promises; for a
superb-looking valley, all natural meadow, lies spread out on either
side of the Sevier, while from a gulch in the mountains on the right,
a stream of vegetation seems to have poured down across the level,
carrying along with its flood of cotton-wood and willow a few stately
old pine-trees. From among the vegetation peeps out a cluster of
miners' houses--for there are the Sevier mines up beyond that pine
gulch--and a ranch or two. Much of the enchantment of distance vanishes
of course as we come down to the level of the plains ourselves and
skirt it close under the hills on the left. But it is a fine location
nevertheless, and some day, no doubt, may be a populous valley. After a
mile or two it narrows, and we cross the river--a wooden bridge, with
a store and barns--("Lisonbee's place") making a pleasant interval of
civilization.

From "Lisonbee's" the road passes up on to and over a stony plateau,
and then descends into the valley again. Cattle and horses are grazing
in the meadow, and the dark patches of wire-grass are spangled with
yellow lupins, and tinted pink in places with patches of a beautiful
orchid-like flower. On the edge of this pleasant-looking tract stand
two small cottages, and to one of these we are welcomed by its
Mormon occupants. To me the whole country had an aspect of desperate
desolation. Yet our host had just come back from "the Post;" his
children were away "at school;" the newspaper on his table was the
latest we had ourselves seen. It is true that the post was literally
a post, with a cigar-box nailed on the top of it, standing all by
itself among the brushwood on the roadside. The school was a mile or
two off, "just over the hill," and, till the regular teacher came, a
volunteer was making shift to impart education to the little scholars
who came straggling over the dreary hill-sides by twos and threes.
Yet, rudimentary though they be, these are the first symptoms of
a civilization triumphing over sage-brush, and give even to such
desperately small beginnings a significance that is very interesting.
All the thriving settlements I have visited began exactly in the
same way--and under worse conditions, too, for the Indian was then a
stronger power than the Mormon.

Our host here had shot among the reeds in his meadow a large bird, the
size of an average goose, black with white spots, which he had been
told was "a loon." It was one of the larger "divers," its neck being
very long and snake-like, terminating in a comparatively small head,
its wings very short and its legs (the feet webbed) set, as in all
diving birds, far back on the body.

Leaving this very young "settlement," we found ourselves again in a
wretched, waterless country, where the vegetation did not compensate
for its monotony by any attractions of colour, nor the mountains for
their baldness by any variety of contour. Here and there stunted cedars
had huddled together for company into a gulch, as if afraid to be
scattered about singly on such lonesome hill-sides, and away on the
right, in a dip under the hills, we caught a glimpse of Marysvale.

Traversing this forbidding tract, we met another waggon on its way to
Munroe, and stopping to exchange greetings, it suddenly occurred to
one of the strangers that by our exchanging vehicles the horses and
their teamsters would both be going home instead of away from it, and
thus everybody be advantaged! The exchange was accordingly effected,
our teamster getting two Bishops in exchange for an Apostle and a
correspondent, and the waggons being turned round in their tracks, the
teams, to their unconcealed satisfaction, started off towards their
respective homes.

Sage-brush and sand, with occasional patches of tiresome rock
fragments and unlimited lizards--nature's hieroglyphics for sultry
sterility--were the only features of the journey. Away on our left,
however, the track of a water-channel, that when completed will turn
many thousands of these arid acres into farm-lands, scarred the red
hill-side, and told the same old story of Mormon industry. Where it
came from I have forgotten, where it was going to I do not remember,
but it was in sight off and on for some thirty miles, and was probably
carrying the waters of the Sevier on to the Circle-ville plains.

We are there ourselves in the evening, and passing through some
ploughed land and meadow, find ourselves upon the wind-swept, lonesome,
location of

THE KINGS OF KINGSTON.

Among the social experiments of Mormonism, the family communism of the
Kings of Kingston deserves a special notice, for, though in my own
opinion it is a failure, both financially and socially, the scheme is
probably one of the most curious attempts at solving a great social
problem that was ever made.

Kingston is the name of a hamlet of fifteen wooden cottages and a
stock-yard which has been planted in the centre of one Of the most
desolate plains in all the Utah Territory--a very Jehunnam of a
plain. Piute County, in which it is situated, is, as a rule, a most
forbidding section of country, and the Kingston "Valley" is perhaps
the dreariest spot in it. The mountains, stern and sterile, ring it in
completely, but on the south-east is a great canyon which might be the
very mouth of the cavern in which the gods used to keep their winds,
for a persistent, malignant wind is perpetually sweeping through it
on to the plain below, and the soil being light and sandy, the people
live for part of the year in a ceaseless dust-storm. One year they
sowed 300 acres with wheat, and the wind simply blew the crop away.
That which it could not actually displace, it kept rubbed down close to
the ground by the perpetual passage of waves of sand. They planted an
orchard, but some gooseberry bushes are the only remaining vestiges of
the plantation, and even these happen to be on the lee side of a solid
fence. They also set out trees to shade their houses, but the wind
worked the saplings round and round in their holes, so that they could
not take root. It can be easily imagined, therefore, that without a
tree, without a green thing except the reach of meadow land at the foot
of the hills, the Kingston plain, with its forlorn fifteen tenements,
looks for most of the year desolation itself. That any one should ever
have settled there is a mystery to all; that he should have remained
there is a simple absurdity, a very Jumbo of a folly. Yet here,
after five years of the most dismal experiences, I found some twenty
households in occupation.

At the time when Brigham Young was exerting himself to extend the
"United Order" (of which more when I come to Orderville), one of the
enthusiasts who embraced its principles was a Mr. King, of Fillmore.
He was a prosperous man, with a family well settled about him.
Nevertheless, he determined from motives of religious philanthropy to
begin life anew, and having sold off all that he possessed he emigrated
with his entire family into the miserable Piute country, selected in
an hour of infatuation the Kingston--then "Circleville"--location,
and announced that he was about to start a co-operative experiment
in farming and general industry on the basis of a household, with
patriarchal government, a purse in common, and a common table for all
to eat at together.

Having been permitted to examine the original articles of enrolment,
dated May 1, 1877--a document, by the way, curiously characteristic of
the whole undertaking, being a jumble of articles and by-laws written
on a few slips of ordinary paper, a miracle of unworldly simplicity and
in very indifferent spelling--I found the objects of "the company,"
as it is called, were "agricultural, manufacturing, commercial, and
other industrial pursuits," and the establishment and maintenance of
"colleges, seminaries, churches, libraries, and any other charitable
or scientific associations." It was to be superintended by a Board,
who were to be elected by a majority of the members, and to receive
for their services "the same wages as are paid to farm hands or other
common labourers."

To become members of this Family Order it was necessary that they
should "bequeath, transfer, and convey into the company all their
right, title, and interest to whatever property, whether personal or
real estate, that they were then possessed of, or might hereafter
become possessed of by legacy, will, or otherwise for the purposes
above mentioned, and further that they would labour faithfully and
honourably themselves, and cause their children who were under age to
labour under the direction of the Board Of Directors, the remuneration
for which shall be as fixed by the board both as to price and kind of
pay he or she shall receive." It was "furthermore understood and agreed
that a schedule or inventory of all property bequeathed or transferred
to the company should be kept, together with the price of each article,
that in case any party becomes dissatisfied or is called away, or
wishes to draw out, he can have as near as may be the same kind of
property, but in no case can he have real estate, only at the option of
the Board, nor shall interest or a dividend be paid on such property."

"We further agree" (so run the articles of this curious incorporation)
"that we will be controlled and guided in all our labour, in our food,
clothing, and habitations for our families" (by the Board), "being
frugal and economical in our manner of living and dress, and in no case
seek to obtain that which is above another."

"We also covenant and agree that all credits for labour that stand to
our names in excess of debits for food and clothing, shall become the
property of the company."

In these four articles is contained the whole of the principles of
this astonishing experiment. Men were to sell their all, and put the
proceeds into a family fund. Out of this, as the wages of their labour,
they were to receive food and other necessaries to the value of $1 a
day, and if at the end of the year their drawings exceeded the amount
of work put in the company "forgave" them the excess, while if their
earnings exceeded their drawings, they "forgave" the company. Thus the
accounts were annually squared by reciprocal accommodation.

If anyone seceded from the Order, he was entitled to receive back
exactly what he had contributed. Mr. King, the father, started by
putting in some $20,000, and his sons and others following suit,
the fund rose at once to some $40,000. (I would say here that the
entirely original method of "keeping the books" makes balance-striking
a difficulty.) With this sum, and so much labour at their disposal,
the Family Company should have been a brilliant success. But several
circumstances conspired disastrously against it. The first was the
unfortunate selection of location, for, in spite of the quantity of
promising land available elsewhere, Mr. King pitched his camp in the
wretched sand-drifts of the Piute section. The next was the ill-advised
generosity of the founders in inviting all the country round to
come and join them, with or without means, so long as they would be
faithful members of the Order. The result, of course, was an influx of
"deadheads"--the company indeed having actually to send out waggons to
haul in families who were too poor to be able to move themselves. Of
these new-comers only a proportion were worth anything to the young
settlement, for many came in simply for the certainty of a roof over
their heads and sufficient food. The result was most discouraging,
and in short time the more valuable adherents were disheartened, and
began to fall off, and now, five years from the establishment of the
company, there are only some twenty families left, and these are all
Kings or relatives of the Kings. The father himself is dead, but four
sons divide the patriarchal government between them, and, having again
reduced the scheme to a strictly family concern, they are thinking of a
fresh start.

What may happen in the future is not altogether certain, but it will be
strange if in this country where individual industry, starting without
a dollar, is certain of a competence, co-operative labour commencing
with funds in hand does not achieve success. At present the company
possesses, besides its land in the valley, and a mill and a woollen
factory, both commencing work, cattle and sheep worth about $10,000,
and horses worth some $12,000 more. This is a tolerable capital for an
association of hard-working men to begin with, but it is significant
of errors in the past that after five years of almost superhuman toil
they should find themselves no better off materially than when they
started. Nor, socially, has the experiment hitherto been a success, for
Kingston is, in my opinion, beyond comparison the lowest in the scale
of all the Mormon settlements that I have seen. It is poverty-stricken
in appearance; its houses outside and inside testify, in unmended
windows and falling plaster, to an absence of that good order which
characterizes so many other villages. The furniture of the rooms and
the quality of the food on the tables are poorer than elsewhere, and
altogether it is only too evident that this family communism has
dragged all down alike to the level of the poorest and the laziest of
its advocates, rather than raised all up to the level of the best off
and the hardest working. The good men have sunk, the others have not
risen, and if it were not so pathetic the Kingston phenomenon would be
exasperating.

But there is a very sincere pathos about this terrible sacrifice of
self for the common good. I do not mean theoretically, but practically.
The men of "the company" are the most saddening community I have ever
visited. They seem, with their gentle manners, wonderful simplicity
of speech, and almost womanly solicitude for the welfare of their
guests, to have lost the strong, hearty spirit which characterizes
these Western conquerors of the deserts. Yet even the hard-working
Mormons speak of them as veritable heroes in work. It is a common thing
to hear men say that "the Kingston men are simply killing themselves
with toil;" and when Western men talk of work as being too hard, you
may rely upon it it is something very exceptional. Almost against
hope these peasants have struggled with difficulties that even they
themselves confess seem insuperable. They have given Nature all the
odds they could, and then gone on fighting her. The result has been
what is seen to-day--a crushed community of men and enfeebled women,
living worse than any other settlement on the whole Mormon line.
Their own stout hearts refuse to believe that they are a failure; but
failure is written in large capital letters on the whole hamlet, and in
italics upon every face within it. The wind-swept sand-drifts in which
the settlement stands, the wretchedness of the tenements and their
surroundings, the haphazard composition of their food, their black
beans and their buffalo berries, the whistling of the wind as it drives
the sand through the boards of the houses, the howling of the coyotes
round the stock-yard--everything from first to last was in accord to
emphasize the desperate desolation. But those who have known them for
all the five years that the experiment has been under trial declare
that their present condition, lamentable as it is, is an improvement
upon their past. When they ate at a common table, the living, it is
said, was even more frugal than it is now, and there was hardly a piece
of crockery among them all, the "family" eating and drinking out of tin
vessels. The women, either from mismanagement among themselves, or want
of order among the men, were unable to bear the burden of ceaseless
cooking, and the common table was thereupon abandoned by a unanimous
vote.

Yet they are courtesy and hospitality itself, and their sufferings have
only clinched their piety. They have not lost one iota of their faith
in their principles, though staggering under the conviction of failure.
Their children have regular schooling, the women are scrupulously neat
in their dress, while profanity and intemperance are unknown.



CHAPTER XVIII.

FROM KINGSTON TO ORDERVILLE.

    On the way to Panguitch--Section-houses not Mormon homes--Through
    wild country--Panguitch and its fish--Forbidden pleasures--At the
    source of the Rio Virgin--The surpassing beauty of Long Valley--The
    Orderville Brethren--A success in Family Communism.

NEXT day we started over the hills for Panguitch, some forty miles
off. And here, by the roadside, was pointed out to me one of those
"section-houses" which a traveller in Utah once mistook for Mormon
"homes," and described "cabins, ten feet by six, built of planks, one
window with no glass in it, one doorway with no door in it." This is an
accurate description enough of a section-house, but it is a mistake to
suppose that any one ever lives in it, as section-houses are only put
up to comply with the Homestead Act, which stipulates for a building
with one doorway and one window being erected upon each lot within a
certain period of its allotment. But they do duty all the same in a
certain class of literature as typical of the squalid depravity of
the Mormons, for, being inhabited by Mormons, it follows, of course,
that several wives, to say nothing of numerous children, have all to
sleep together "on the floor of the single room the house contains!"
Isn't this a dreadful picture! And are not these large polygamous
families who live in section-houses a disgrace to America? But,
unfortunately for this telling picture, the only "inhabitants" of these
section-houses are Gentile tramps.

A rough hill-road, strewn with uncompromising rocks, jolted us for
some miles, and then we crossed a stream-bed with some fine old pines
standing in it, and beds of blue lupins brightening the margin, and
so came down to the river level, and along a lane running between
hedges of wild-rose and redberry (the "opie" of the Indians) tangled
with clematis and honeysuckle, and haunted by many birds and brilliant
butterflies. The river bubbled along among thickets of golden currant
and red willow, and mallards with russet heads floated in the quiet
backwaters, by the side of their dames all dressed in dainty grey. It
was altogether a charming passage in a day of such general dreariness,
reminding one of a pleasant quotation from some pretty poem in the
middle of a dull chapter by some prosy writer.

But the dulness recommences, and then we find ourselves at a wayside
farm, where a couple of fawns with bells round their necks are keeping
the calves company, and some boys are fishing on a little log bridge.
These fish must have been all born idiots, or been stricken with
unanimous lunacy in early youth, for the manner of their capture
was this. The angler lay on his stomach on the "bridge" (it was a
three foot and a half stream), with one eye down between two of the
logs. When he saw any fish he thrust his "rod"--it was more like a
penholder--through the space, and held it in front of the fishes'
noses. At the end of the rod were some six inches of string, with a
hook tied on with a large knot, and baited with a dab of dough. When
the fish had got thoroughly interested in the dough, the angler would
jerk up his rod, and by some unaccountable oversight on the part of
the fishes it was found that about once in fifty jerks a fish came up
out of the water! They seemed tome to be young trout; but, whatever
the species, they must have been the most imbecile of finned things. I
suggested catching them with the finger and thumb, but the boys giggled
at me, as "the fish wouldn't let ye." But I am of a different opinion,
for it seemed to me that fish that would let you catch them with such
apparatus, would let you catch them without any at all.

From here to Panguitch the road lies through stony country of the
prevalent exasperating type until we reach the precincts of the
settlement, heralded long before we reach it by miles of fencing that
enclose the grazing-land stretching down to the river. A detestable
road, broken up and swamped by irrigation channels, leads into the
settlement, and the poor impression thus received is not removed as we
pass through the treeless "streets" and among the unfenced lots. But
it is an interesting spot none the less, for apart from its future,
it is a good starting-point for many places of interest. But I should
like to have visited Red Lake and Panguitch Lake. "Panguitch," by the
way, means "fish" in the red man's language, and it is no wonder,
therefore, that at breakfast we enjoyed one of the most splendid dishes
of mountain-lake trout that was ever set before man. It is a great fish
certainly--and I prefer it broiled. To put any sauce to it is sheer
infamy.

The beaver, by the way, is still to be trapped here, and the grizzly
bear is not a stranger to Panguitch.

Looking out of the window in the evening, I saw a cart standing by
the roadside, and a number of men round it. Their demeanour aroused
my curiosity, for an extreme dejection had evidently marked them for
its own. Some sate in the road as if waiting in despair for Doomsday;
others prowled round the cart and leant in a melancholy manner against
it. The cart, it appeared, had come from St. George, the vine-growing
district in the south of the territory, and contained a cask of wine.
But as there was no licence in Panguitch for the sale of liquors, it
could not be broached! I never saw men look so wretchedly thirsty
in my life, and if glaring at the cask and thumping it could have
emptied it, there would not have been a drop left. It was a delightful
improvement upon the tortures of Tantalus, but the victims accepted the
joke as being against them, and though they watched the cart going away
gloomily enough, there was no ill-temper.

From Panguitch to Orderville, fifty miles, the scenery opens with
the dreary hills that had become so miserably familiar, alternating
with level pasture-lands, among which the serpentine Sevier winds a
curiously fantastic course. But gradually there grows upon the mind a
sense of coming change. Verdure creeps over the plains, and vegetation
steals on to the hill-sides, and then suddenly as if for a surprise,
the complete beauty of Long Valley bursts upon the traveller. I cannot
in a few words say more of it than that this valley--through which the
Rio Virgin flows, and in which the Family Communists of Orderville have
pitched their tents--rivals in its beauty the scenery of Cashmere.

Springing from a hill-side, beautiful with flowering shrubs and
instinct with bird life, the Virgin River trickles through a deep
meadow bright with blue iris plants and walled in on either side by
hills that are clothed with exquisite vegetation, and then, collecting
its young waters into a little channel, breaks away prattling into
the valley. Corn-fields and orchards, and meadows filled with grazing
kine, succeed each other in pleasant series, and on the right hand
and on the left the mountains lean proudly back with their loads of
magnificent pine. And other springs come tumbling down to join the
pretty river, which flows on, gradually widening as it goes, past
whirring saw-mills and dairies half buried among fruit-trees, through
park-like glades studded with pines of splendid girth, and pretty
brakes of berry-bearing trees all flushed with blossoms. And the valley
opens away on either side into grassy glens from which the tinkle of
cattle-bells falls pleasantly on the ear, or into bold canyons that
are draped close with sombre pines, and end in the most magnificent
cathedral cliffs of ruddy sandstone.

What lovely bits of landscape! What noble studies of rock architecture!
It is a very panorama of charms, and, travelled widely as I have, I
must confess to an absolute novelty of delight in this exquisite valley
of

THE ORDERVILLE BRETHREN.

Among the projects which occupied Joseph Smith's active brain was one
that should make the whole of the Mormon community a single family,
with a purse in common, and the head of the Church its head. In theory
they are so already. But Joseph Smith hoped to see them so in actual
practice also, and for this purpose--the establishment of a universal
family communism--he instituted "The Order of Enoch," or "The United
Order."

Why Enoch? The Mormons themselves appear to have no definite
explanation beyond the fact that Enoch was holy beyond all his
generation. But for myself, I see in it only another instance of
that curious sympathy with ancient tradition which Joseph Smith, and
after him Brigham Young, so consistently showed. They were both of
them as ignorant as men could be in the knowledge that comes from
books, and yet each of them must have had some acquaintance with the
mystic institutions of antiquity, or their frequent coincidence with
primitive ideas and schemes appears to me inexplicable. No man can in
these days think and act like an antediluvian by accident. Josephus
is, I find, a favourite author among the Mormons, and Josephus may
account for a little. Moreover, many of the Mormons, notably both
Presidents, are or were Freemasons, and this may account for some more.
But for the balance I can find no explanation. Now I remember reading
somewhere--perhaps in Sir Thomas Browne--that "the patriarchal Order
of Enoch" is an institution of prodigious antiquity; that Enoch in the
Hebrew means "the teacher;" that he was accepted in prehistoric days as
the founder of a self-supporting, pious socialism, which was destined
(should destruction overtake the world) to rescue one family at any
rate from the general ruin, and perpetuate the accumulated knowledge of
the past. And it is exactly upon these conditions that we find Joseph
Smith, fifty years ago, promulgating in a series of formulated rules,
the scheme of a patriarchal "Order of Enoch."

All Mormons are "elect." But even among the elect there is an
aristocracy of piety. Thus in Islam we find the Hajji faithful above
the faithful. In Hindooism the brotherhood of the Coolinsis accepted by
the gods above all the other "twice-born." Is it not, indeed, the same
in every religion--that there are the chosen within the chosen--"though
they were mighty men, yet they were not of the three"--a tenth legion
among the soldiers of Heaven--the archangels in the select ministry
of the Supreme? In Mormonism, therefore, if a man chooses, he may
consecrate himself to his faith more signally than his fellows, by
endowing the Church with all his goods, and accepting from the Church
afterwards the "stewardship" of a portion of his own property! It is
no mere lip-consecration, no Ritualists' "Order of Jesus," no question
of a phylactery. It means the absolute transfer of all property and
temporal interests, and of all rights of all kinds therein, to the
Church by a formal, legal process, and a duly attested deed. Here is
one:--

"Be it known by these presents, that I, Jesse W. Fox, of Great Salt
Lake City, in the county of Great Salt Lake, and territory of Utah,
for and in consideration of the sum of one hundred ($100) dollars and
the good-will which I have to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints, give and convey unto Brigham Young, trustee in trust for the
said Church, his successor in office and assigns, all my claims to and
ownership of the following-described property, to wit:

  One house and lot . . . . . . . . . . . . $1000
  One city lot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .100
  East half of lot 1, block 12 . . . . . . . . 50
  Lot 1, block 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .75
  Two cows, $50; two calves, $15 . . . . . . . 65
  One mare, $100; one colt, $50 . . . . . . . 150
  One watch, $20; one clock, $12 . . . . . . . 32
  Clothing, $300; beds and bedding, $125. . . 425
  One stove, $20; household furniture, $210. .230
                                              --
  Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $2127

together with all the rights, privileges, and appurtenances thereunto
belonging or appertaining. I also covenant and agree that I am the
lawful claimant and owner of said property, and will warrant and for
ever defend the same unto the said trustee in trust, his successor in
office and assigns, against the claims of my heirs, assigns, or any
person whomsoever."

Then follows the attestation of the witness; and the formal certificate
of the Judge of the Probate Court that "the signer of the above
transfer, personally known to me, appeared the second day of April,
1857, and acknowledged that he, of his own choice, executed the
foregoing transfer."

Such transfers of property are not, I know, infrequent in other
religions, notably the Roman Catholic, but the object of the Mormon's
piety distinguishes his act from that of others. Had Brigham Young
persevered in his predecessor's project, it is almost certain that he
would have established a gigantic "company" that would have controlled
all the temporal interests of the territory, and eventually comprised
the whole Mormon population. It is just possible that he himself
foresaw that such success would be ruin; that the foundations of
the Order would sink under such a prodigious superstructure, for he
diverted his attention from the main to subsidiary schemes. Instead of
one central organization sending out colonies on all sides of it, he
advised the establishment of branch communities, which might eventually
be gathered together under a single headquarters' control. The two
projects were the same as to results; they differed only as to the
means; and the second was the more judicious.

A few individuals came forward in their enthusiasm to give all they
possessed to a common cause, but the Order flagged, though, nominally,
many joined it. Thus, travelling through the settlements, I have
seen in a considerable number of homes the Rules of the Order framed
upon the walls. At any time these would be curious; to-day, when the
morality of the principles of Mormonism is challenged, they are of
special interest:--

"RULES THAT SHOULD BE OBSERVED BY MEMBERS OF THE UNITED ORDER.

"We will not take the name of the Deity in vain, nor speak lightly of
His character or of sacred things.

"We will pray with our families morning and evening, and also attend to
secret prayer.

"We will observe and keep the Word of Wisdom according to the spirit
and the meaning thereof.

"We will treat our families with due kindness and affection, and
set before them an example worthy of imitation. In our families and
intercourse with all persons, we will refrain from being contentious or
quarrelsome, and we will cease to speak evil of each other, and will
cultivate a spirit of charity towards all. We consider it our duty to
keep from acting selfishly or from covetous motives, and will seek the
interest of each other and the salvation of all mankind.

"We will observe the Sabbath day to keep it holy, in accordance with
the Revelations.

"That which is committed to our care we will not appropriate to our own
use.

"That which we borrow we will return according to promise, and that
which we find we will not appropriate to our own use, but seek to
return it to its proper owner.

"We will, as soon as possible, cancel all individual indebtedness
contracted prior to our uniting with the order, and, when once fully
identified with said order, will contract no debts contrary to the
wishes of the Board of Directors.

"We will patronize our brethren who are in the order.

"In our apparel and deportment we will not pattern after nor encourage
foolish and extravagant fashions, and cease to import or buy from
abroad any article which can be reasonably dispensed with, or which
can be produced by combination of home labour. We will foster and
encourage the producing and manufacturing of all articles needful for
our consumption as fast as our circumstances will permit.

"We will be simple in our dress and manner of living, using proper
economy and prudence in the management of all intrusted to our care.

"We will combine our labour for mutual benefit, sustain with our faith,
prayers, and works those whom we have elected to take the management of
the different departments of the order, and be subject to them in their
official capacity, refraining from a spirit of fault-finding.

"We will honestly and diligently labour and devote ourselves and all we
have to the order and to the building up Of the Kingdom of God."

Under these general regulations a great number, as I have said,
enrolled themselves, and they may be considered therefore to
constitute, as it were, a Knight Templar commandery within a
Fellowcraft lodge. All are "brethren;" these are illustrious brethren.
All are pashas; these are "of many tails." All are mandarins of heaven;
these wear the supreme button.

But the temporal object of the Order was not served by such transfers
of moral obligations; by the hypothecation of personal piety; by
the investment of spiritual principles in a common fund. You cannot
get much working capital out of mortgages on a man's soul. Calchas
complained bitterly when the Athenian public paid their vows to the
goddess in squashes. The collector, he said, would not take them in
payment of the water-rates. So it has fared with the Order of Enoch. It
is wealthy in good intentions, and if promises were dollars could draw
large checks.

Here and there, however, local fervour took practical shape. The Kings
of Kingston planted their family flag on the wind-swept Circleville
plain. At Sunset another communistic colony was established, and in
Long Valley, in the canyons of the Rio Virgin, was inaugurated the
"United Order of Orderville."

Situated in a beautiful valley that needs nothing more added to it to
make its inhabitants entirely self-supporting; directed and controlled
with as much business shrewdness as fervent piety; supported by its
members with a sensible regard for mutual interests--this Orderville
experiment bids fair to be a signal success. In their Articles Of
Association the members call themselves a Corporation which is "to
continue in existence for a period of twenty-five years," and of which
the objects are every sort of "rightful" enterprise and industry that
may render the Order independent of outside produce and manufactures,
"consistent with the Constitution of the United States and the laws of
this Territory." Its capital is fixed at $100,000, in 10,000 shares of
$10 each, and the entire control of its affairs is vested in a board
of nine directors, who are elected by a ballot of the whole community.
Article 13 "the individual or private property of the states that
stockholders shall not be liable for the debts or obligations of the
company." Article 15 is as follows: "The directors shall have the
right and power to declare dividends on said stock whenever, in their
judgment, there are funds for that purpose due and payable."

Now, in these two last articles lie the saving principles of the
Orderville scheme, Hitherto, from the beginning of the world,
experiments in communism have always split upon this rock, namely,
that individuality was completely crushed out. No man was permitted
to possess "private" property--he was l'enfant de la République, body
and soul--and no man, therefore, had sufficient personal identity
to make it possible for individual profits to accrue to him. And
so the best of the young men--let the experiment be at any date in
history you like--became dissatisfied with the level at which they
were kept, and they seceded. They insisted on having names of their
own, and refused to be merely, like the members of a jail republic,
known by numbers. Individuality and identity are the original data
of human consciousness. They are the first solid facts which a baby
masters and communicates; they are the last that old age surrenders to
infirmity and death. But in Orderville, it will be seen, the notion of
"private" property exists. It is admitted that there is such a thing
as "individual" ownership. Moreover, it is within the power of the
board to pay every man a dividend. This being the case, this particular
experiment in communism has the possibility of great success, for its
members are not utterly deprived of all individuality. They have some
shreds of it left to them.

To become a member of the Order there is no qualification of property
necessary. The aged and infirm are accepted in charity. Indeed, at one
time they threatened to swamp the family altogether, for the brethren
seemed to have set out with a dead-weight upon them heavier than they
could bear. But this has righted itself. The working members have got
the ship round again, and in one way or another a place and a use has
been found for every one. Speaking generally, however, membership
meant the holding of stock in the corporation. If a man wished to
join the Order, he gave in to the Bishop a statement of his effects.
It was left to his conscience that this statement should be complete
and exhaustive; that there should be no private reservations. These
effects--whatever they might be, from a farm in another part of the
Territory to the clothes in his trunk--were appraised by the regular
staff, and the equivalent amount in stock, at $10 a share, was issued
to them. From that time his ownership in his property ceased. His books
would perhaps go into the school-house library, his extra blankets next
door, his horse into a neighbour's team. According to his capacities,
also, he himself fell at once into his place among the workers, going
to the woollen factory or the carpenter's shop, the blacksmith's forge
or the dairy, the saw-mills or the garden, the grist-mill or the
farm, according as his particular abilities gave promise of his being
most useful. His work here would result, as far as he was personally
concerned, in no profits. But he was assured of a comfortable house,
abundant food, good clothes. The main responsibilities of life were
therefore taken off his shoulders. The wolf could never come to his
door. He and his were secured against hunger and cold. But beyond
this? There was only the approbation of his companions, the reward
of his conscience. With the proceeds of his labour, or by the actual
work of his own hands, he saw new buildings going up, new acres coming
under cultivation. But none of them belonged to him. He never became a
proprietor, an owner, a master. While therefore he was spared the worst
responsibilities of life, he was deprived of its noblest ambitions.
He lived without apprehensions, but without hopes too. If his wife
was ill or his children sickly, there were plenty of kind neighbours
to advise and nurse and look after them. No anxieties on such matters
need trouble him. But if he had any particular taste--music, botany,
anything--he was unable to gratify it, unless these same kindly
neighbours agreed to spend from the common fund in order to buy him
a violin or a flower-press--and they could hardly be expected to
do so. Quite apart from the fact that a man learning to play a new
instrument is an enemy of his kind, you could not expect a community of
graziers, farmers, and artisans to be unanimously enthusiastic about
the musical whims of one of their number, still less for his "crank"
in collecting "weeds"--as everything that is not eatable (or is not a
rose) is called in most places of the West. Tastes, therefore, could
not be cultivated for the want of means, and any special faculties
which members might individually possess were of necessity kept in
abeyance. Amid scenery that might distract an artist, and fossil and
insect treasures enough to send men of science crazy, the community
can do nothing in the direction of Art or of Natural History, unless
they all do it together. For the Order cannot spare a man who may be a
good ploughman, to go and sit about in the canyons painting pictures
of pine-trees and waterfalls. Nor can it spare the money that may be
needed for shingles in buying microscopes for a "bug-hunter." The
common prosperity, therefore, can only be gained at a sacrifice of all
individual tastes. This alone is a very serious obstacle to success of
the highest kind. But in combination with this is of course the more
general and formidable fact that even in the staple industries of the
community individual excellence brings with it no individual benefits.
A moral trades-unionism planes all down to a level. It does not, of
course, prevent the enthusiast working his very hardest and best in
the interests of his neighbours. But such enthusiasm is hardly human.
Men will insist, to the end of all time, on enjoying the reward of
their own labours, the triumphs of their own brains. Some may go so
far as nominally to divide their honours with all their friends. But
where shall we look for the man who will go on all his life toiling
successfully for the good of idler folks, and checking his own free
stride to keep pace with their feebler steps? And this is the rock on
which all such communities inevitably strike.

Security from the ordinary apprehensions of life; a general protection
against misfortune and "bad seasons;" the certainty of having all the
necessaries of existence, are sufficient temptations for unambitious
men. But the stronger class of mind, though attracted to it by piety,
and retained for a while by a sincere desire to promote the common
good, must from their very nature revolt against a permanent alienation
of their own earnings, and a permanent subordination of their own
merits. At Orderville, therefore, we find the young men already
complaining of a system which does not let them see the fruits of their
work. Their fathers' enthusiasm brought them there as children. Seven
years later they are grown up into independent-minded young men. They
have not had experience of family anxieties yet. All they know is, that
beyond Orderville there are larger spheres of work, and more brilliant
opportunities for both hand and head.

Fortunately, however, for Orderville, the articles of incorporation
give the directors the very powers that are necessary, and if these
are exercised the ship may miss the rock that has wrecked all its
predecessors. If they can declare dividends, open private accounts, and
realize the idea of personal property, the difference in possibilities
between the outer world and Orderville will be very greatly reduced,
while the advantage of certainties in Orderville will be even further
increased. Young men would then think twice about going away, and
any one if he chose could indulge his wife with a piano or himself
with a box of water-colours. Herein then lies the hopefulness of
the experiment; and fortunately Mr. Howard Spencer, the President
of the community, has all the generosity to recognize the necessity
for concession to younger ambition, and all the courage to institute
and carry out a modification of communism which shall introduce more
individuality. I anticipate, therefore, that this very remarkable and
interesting colony will survive the "twenty-five years" period for
which it was established, and will encourage the foundation of many
other similar "Family Orders."

Seven years have passed since Mr. Spencer pitched his camp in the
beautiful wilderness of the Rio Virgin canyons. He found the hills
of fine building-stone, their sides thickly grown with splendid pine
timber, and down the valley between them flowing a bright and ample
stream. The vegetation by its variety and luxuriance gave promise of
a fertile soil; some of the canyons formed excellent natural meadows,
while just over the ridge, a mile or two from the settlement, lay a
bed of coal. Finally, the climate was delightfully temperate! Every
condition of success, therefore, was found together, and prosperity
has of course responded to the voice of industry. Acre by acre the
wild gardens have disappeared, and in their place stand broad fields
of corn; the tangled brakes of wild-berry plants have yielded their
place to orchards of finer fruits; cattle and sheep now graze in
numbers where the antelope used to feed; and from slope to slope you
can hear among the pines, above the idle crooning of answering doves
and the tinkling responses of wandering kine, the glad antiphony of the
whirring saw-mill and the busy loom.

The settlement itself is grievously disappointing in appearance. For
as you approach it, past the charming little hamlet of Glendale, past
such a sunny wealth of orchard and meadow and corn-land, past such
beautiful glimpses of landscape, you cannot help expecting a scene of
rural prettiness in sympathy with such surroundings. But Orderville
at first sight looks like a factory. The wooden shed-like buildings
built in continuous rows, the adjacent mills, the bare, ugly patch of
hillside behind it, give the actual settlement an uninviting aspect.
But once within the settlement, the scene changes wonderfully for the
better. The houses are found, the most of them, built facing inwards
upon an open square, with a broad side-walk, edged with tamarisk
and mulberry, box-elder and maple-trees, in front of them. Outside
the dwelling-house square are scattered about the school-house,
meeting-house, blacksmith and carpenters' shops, tannery, woollen-mill,
and so forth, while a broad roadway separates the whole from the
orchards, gardens, and farm-lands generally. Specially noteworthy
here are the mulberry orchard--laid out for the support of the
silk-worms, which the community are now rearing with much success--and
the forcing-ground and experimental garden, in which wild flowers as
well as "tame" are being cultivated. Among the buildings the more
interesting to me were the school-houses, well fitted up, and very
fairly provided with educational apparatus; and the rudimentary museum,
where the commencement of a collection of the natural curiosities of
the neighbourhood is displayed. What this may some day grow into, when
science has had the chance of exploring the surrounding hills and
canyons, it is difficult to say; for Nature has favoured Orderville
profusely with fossil strata and mineral eccentricities, a rich variety
of bird and insect life, and a prodigious botanical luxuriance. Almost
for the first time in my travels, too, I found here a very intelligent
interest taken in the natural history of the locality; but the absence
of books and of necessary apparatus, as yet of course prevents the
brethren from carrying on their studies and experiments to any standard
of scientific value.

Though staying in Orderville so short a time, I was fortunate enough
to see the whole community together. For on the evening of my arrival
there was a meeting at which there was a very full gathering of the
adults--and the babies in arms. The scene was as curious as anything I
have ever witnessed in any part of the world. The audience was almost
equally composed of men and women, the latter wearing, most of them,
their cloth sun-bonnets, and bringing with them the babies they were
nursing.

Brigham Young used to encourage mothers to bring them, and said that he
liked to hear them squalling in the Tabernacle. Whether he really liked
it or not, the mothers did as he said, and the babies too, and the
perpetual bleating of babies from every corner of the building makes it
seem to this day as if religious service was being held in a sheepfold.
Throughout the proceedings at Orderville babies were being constantly
handed across from mother to neighbour and back from neighbour
to mother. Others were being tossed up and down with that jerky,
perpendicular motion which seems so soothing to the very young, but
which reminded me of the popping up and down of the hammers when the
"lid" of a piano is lifted up during a performance. But the baby is an
irrepressible person, and at Orderville has it very much its own way.
The Apostle's voice in prayer was accepted as a challenge to try their
lungs, and the music (very good, by the way) as a mere obligato to
their own vocalization. The patient gravity of the mothers throughout
the whole performance, and the apparent indifference of the men, struck
me as very curious--for I come from a country where one baby will
plunge a whole church congregation into profanity, and where it is
generally supposed that two crying together would empty heaven. Of the
men of Orderville I can say sincerely that a healthier, more stalwart
community I have never seen, while among the women, I saw many refined
faces, and remarked that robust health seemed the rule. Next morning
the children were paraded, and such a brigade of infantry as it was!
Their legs (I think, though, they are known as "limbs" in America) were
positively columnar, and their chubby little owners were as difficult
to keep quietly in line as so much quicksilver. Orderville boasts that
it is self-supporting and independent of outside help, and certainly in
the matter of babies there seems no necessity for supplementing home
manufactures by foreign imports. The average of births is as yet five
in each family during the six years of the existence of the Order! Two
were born the day I arrived.

Unfortunately one of the most characteristic features of this family
community was in abeyance during my visit--the common dining-table. For
a rain-flood swept through the gorge above the settlement last winter
and destroyed "the bakery." Since then the families have dined apart or
clubbed together in small parties, but the wish of the majority is to
see the old system revived, for though they live well now, they used,
they say, to live even better when "the big table" was laid for its 200
guests at once.

Self-supporting and well-directed, therefore, the Orderville
"communists" bid fair to prove to the world that pious enthusiasm,
if largely tempered with business judgment, can make a success of an
experiment which has hitherto baffled all attempts based upon either
one or the other alone.



CHAPTER XIX.

MORMON VIRTUES.

    Red ants and anti-Mormons--Ignorance of the Mormons among
    Gentiles in Salt Lake City--Mormon reverence for the Bible--Their
    struggle against drinking-saloons in the city--Conspicuous
    piety in the settlements--Their charity--Their sobriety (to
    my great inconvenience)--The literature of Mormonism utterly
    unreliable--Neglect of the press by the Saints--Explanation of the
    wide-spread misrepresentation of Mormonism.

FROM Orderville (after a short tour in the south-west of the Territory)
I returned to Salt Lake City, and during my second sojourn there,
over a month, I saw nothing and learned nothing either from Mormon or
Gentile to induce me to erase a single word I had written during my
previous visit. Indeed, a better acquaintance only strengthened my
first favourable opinions of "the Saints of the Rocky Mountains."

I was walking one day up the City Creek, when I became aware of an aged
man seated on a stone by the roadside. His trousers were turned up to
his knees, and he was nursing one of his legs as if he felt a great
pity for it. As I approached I perceived that he was in trouble--(I
perceived this by his oaths)--and getting still nearer I ventured
to inquire what annoyed him. "Aged person," said I, "what aileth
thee?"--or words to that effect. But there was no response, at least
not worth mentioning. He only bent further over his leg, and I noticed
that his coat had split down the back seam. His cursing accounted for
that. It was sufficient to make any coat split. And then his hat fell
off his head into the dust, in judgment upon him. At this he swore
again, horribly. By this time I had guessed that he had been bitten by
red ants (and they are the shrewdest reptiles at biting that I know
of), so I said, "Bitten by red ants, eh?" At this he exploded with
wrath, and looked up. And such a face! He had a countenance on him like
the ragged edge of despair. His appearance was a calamity. "Red ants,"
said he; "red Indians, red devils, red hell!" and then, relapsing into
the vernacular, he became unintelligibly profane, but ended up with
"this damned Mormon city."

Now here was a man, fairly advanced in years, fairly clothed, fairly
uneducated. As I had never seen him before, he may have been, for all I
know, "the average American" I so often see referred to. Anyhow, there
he was, cursing the Mormons because he had been bitten by red ants! Of
his own stupidity he had gone and stood upon an ants' nest, thrust his
hippopotamus foot into their domicile, overwhelming the nurseries and
the parlours in a common catastrophe, crushing with the same heel the
grandsire ant and the sucking babe at its mother's breast, mashing up
the infirm and the feeble with the eggs in the cells and the household
provisions laid up in the larder--ruining in fact an industrious
community simply by his own weight in butcher's meat. Some of the
survivors promptly attacked the intruding boot, and, running up what
the old man was pleased to call "his blasted pants," had bitten the
legs which they found concealed within them. And for this, "the average
American" cursed the Mormons and their city!

The incident interested me, for, apart from my sympathy with the
ants, I couldn't help thinking what a powerful adversary to Mormonism
this trifling mishap might have created. That man went back to his
hotel (for he was evidently a "visitor") a confirmed anti-Mormon. His
darkest suspicions about polygamy were confirmed. His detestation of
the bestial licentiousness of the Saints was increased a hundred-fold.
He saw at a glance that all he had ever heard about "the Danites" was
quite true, and much more too that he had never heard but could now
easily invent for himself. There was no need for any one to tell him,
after the way he had been treated within a mile of the Tabernacle, of
the infamous debaucheries of Brigham Young with his "Cyprian maids" and
his "cloistered wives." Wasn't it as plain as the sun at noonday that
the Mormons were in league with the red Indians, and went halves in the
proceeds of each other's massacres?

The ant-bitten man was a very typical "Mormon-eater," for such
is the local name of those who revile Mormonism root and branch
because they find intelligent men opposed to polygamy. They are
under the impression, seeing and talking to nobody but each other,
that the United States in a mass, that the whole world, entertain an
unreasoning, fanatical abhorrence of the inhabitants of the Territory,
and share with them their mean parochial jealousy of the Mormon
tradesmen and Mormon farmers who are more thriving than they are
themselves.

Here in Salt Lake City there is the most extraordinary ignorance
of Mormonism that can be imagined. I have actually been assured
by "Gentiles" that the Saints do not believe in the God of the
Bible--that adultery among them is winked at by husbands under a
tacit understanding of reciprocity--that the Mormons as a class
are profane, and drunken, and so forth. Now, if they knew anything
whatever of the Mormons, such statements would be impossible (unless
of course made in wilful malice), for my personal acquaintance with
"the Saints" has shown me that in all classes alike the reverence
for the God of the Bible is formulated not only in their morning and
evening prayers, but in their grace before every meal; that so far
from there being any exceptional familiarity between families, the
very reverse is conspicuous, for so strict is the Mormon etiquette of
social courtesies, that households which in England would be on the
most intimate terms, maintain here a distant formality which impresses
the stranger as being cold; that instead of the Mormons being as a
class profane, they are as a class singularly sober in their language,
and indeed in this respect resemble the Quakers. Now, my opinions are
founded upon facts of personal knowledge and experience.

Of course it will be said of me that as I was a "guest" of Mormons
I was "bound" to speak well of them; that as I was so much among
them I was hoodwinked and "shown the best side of everything," &c.,
&c. Against this argument, always the resource of the gobemouche,
common sense is useless. "Against stupidity the gods themselves are
powerless." But this I can say--that I will defy any really impure
household, monogamous or not, to hoodwink me in the same way--to keep
up from morning to night the same unchanging profession of piety, to
make believe from week to week with such consummate hypocrisy that they
are god-fearing and pure in their lives, and to wear a mask of sobriety
with such uniform success. And I am not speaking of one household only,
but of a score to which I was admitted simply as being a stranger from
whom they need not fear calumny. I do not believe that acting exists
anywhere in such perfection that a whole community can assume, at a few
hours' notice and for the benefit of a passing stranger, the characters
of honest, kind-hearted, simple men and women, and set themselves
patiently to a three months' comedy of pretended purity. Such impostors
do not exist.

The Mormons drunken! Now what, for instance, can be the conclusion of
any honest thinker from this fact--that though I mixed constantly with
Mormons, all of them anxious to show me every hospitality and courtesy,
I was never at any time asked to take a glass of strong drink? If I
wanted a horse to ride or to drive I had a choice at once offered me.
If I wanted some one to go with me to some point of interest, his
time was mine. Yet it never occurred to them to show a courtesy by
suggesting "a drink."

Then, seriously, how can any one have respect for the literature or the
men who, without knowing anything of the lives of Mormons, stigmatize
them as profane, adulterous, and drunken? As a community I know them,
from personal advantages of observation such as no non-Mormon writer
has ever previously possessed, [1] to be at any rate exceptionally
careful in maintaining the appearance of piety and sobriety; and I
leave it to my readers to judge whether such solid hypocrisy as this,
that tries to abolish all swearing and all strong drink both by precept
from the pulpit and example in the household, is not, after all, nearly
as admirable as the real thing itself.

This, at all events, is beyond doubt--that the Mormons have always
struggled hard to prevent the sale of liquor in Salt Lake City, except
under strict regulations and supervision. But the fight has gone
against them. The courts uphold the right of publicans to sell when and
what they choose; and the Mormons, who could at one time boast--and
visitors without number have borne evidence to the fact--that a
drunkard was never to be seen, an oath never to be heard, in the
streets of their city, have now to confess that, thanks to the example
of Gentiles, they have both drunkards and profane men among them. But
the general attitude of the Church towards these delinquents, and
the sorrow that their weakness causes in the family circle, are in
themselves proofs of the sincerity in sobriety which distinguishes the
Mormons. Nor is it any secret that if the Mormons had the power they
would to-morrow close all the saloons and bars, except those under
Church regulation, and then, they say, "we might hope to see the old
days back when we never thought of locking our doors at night, and when
our wives and girls, let them be out ever so late, needed no escort in
the streets."

And having travelled throughout the Mormon settlements, I am at a loss
how to convey to my readers with any brevity the effect which the tour
has had upon me.

I have seen, and spoken to, and lived with, Mormon men and women of
every class, and never in my life in any Christian country, not even
in happy, rural England, have I come in contact with more consistent
piety, sobriety, and neighbourly charity. I say this deliberately.
Without a particle of odious sanctimony these folk are, in their words
and actions, as Christian as I had ever thought to see men and women. A
perpetual spirit of charity seems to possess them, and if the prayers
of simple, devout humanity are ever of any avail, it must surely be
this wonderful Mormon earnestness in appeals to Heaven. I have often
watched Moslems in India praying, and thought then that I had seen
the extremity of devotion, but now that I have seen these people on
their knees in their kitchens at morning and at night, and heard their
old men--men who remember the dark days of the Faith--pour out from
their hearts their gratitude for past mercy, their pleas for future
protection, I find that I have met with even a more striking form
of prayer than I have ever met with before. Equally striking is the
universal reverence and affection with which they, quite unconscious of
the fact that I was "taking notes," spoke of the authorities of their
Church. Fear there was none, but respect and love were everywhere. It
would be a bold man who, in one of these Mormon hamlets, ventured to
repeat the slanders current among Gentiles elsewhere. And it would
indeed be a base man who visited these hard-living, trustful men and
women, and then went away to calumniate them.

But it is a fact, and cannot be challenged, that the only people in
all Utah who libel these Mormons are either those who are ignorant of
them, those who have apostatized (frequently under compulsion) from
the Church, or those, the official clique and their sycophants, who
have been charged with looking forward to a share of the plunder of
the Territorial treasury. On the other hand, I know many Gentiles who,
though like myself they consider polygamy itself detestable, speak of
this people as patterns to themselves in commercial honesty, religious
earnestness, and social charity.

Travelling through the settlements, I found that every one voluntarily
considered his poorer neighbours as a charge upon himself. When a man
arrives there, a stranger and penniless, one helps to get together logs
for his first hut, another to break up a plot of ground. A third lends
him his waggon to draw some firewood from the canyon or hillside; a
fourth gives up some of his time to show him how to bring the water
on to his ground--and so on through all the first requirements of the
forlorn new-comer. Behind them all meanwhile is the Church, in the
person of the presiding Elder of the settlement, who makes him such
advances as are considered necessary. It is a wonderful system, and
as pathetic, to my mind, as any struggle for existence that I have
ever witnessed. But every man who comes among them is another unit of
strength, and let him be only a straight-spoken, fair-dealing fellow,
with his heart in his work, and he finds every one's hand ready to
assist him.

And the first commencement is terribly small. A one-roomed log hut is
planted in a desert of sage-brush "with roots that hold as firm as
original sin," and rocks that are as hard to get rid of as bad habits.
Borrowing a plough here, and a shovel there, the new-comer bungles
through an acre or two of furrows, and digs out a trench. Begging of
one neighbour some fruit-tree cuttings, he sticks the discouraging
twigs into the ground, and by working out some extra time for another
gets some lucerne seed. Then he gets a hen, and then a setting of eggs,
by-and-by a heifer, and a little later, by putting in work or by an
advance from the Church, or with kindly help from a neighbour, he adds
a horse to his stock. Time passes, say a year; his orchard (that is to
be) has several dozen leaves on it, and the ground is all green with
lucerne, the chickens are thriving, and he adds an acre or two more to
the first patch, and his neighbours, seeing him in earnest, are still
ready with their advice and aid. Adobe bricks are gradually piled up
in a corner of the lot, and very soon an extra room or two is built
on to the log hut, and saplings of cotton-wood, or poplar, or locust
are planted in a row before the dwelling: and so on year by year,
conquering a little more of the sage-brush, bringing on the water a
furlong further, adding an outhouse, planting another tree. At the end
of ten years--years of unsparing, untiring labour, but years brightened
with perpetual kindness from neighbours--this man, the penniless
emigrant, invites the wayfarer into his house, has a comfortably
furnished bedroom at his service, oats and fodder for his team, ample
and wholesome food for all. The wife spreads the table with eggs and
ham and chicken, vegetables, pickles, and preserves, milk and cream,
pies and puddings--"Yes, sir, all of our own raising." The dismal
twigs have grown up into pleasant shade-trees, and a flower-garden
brightens the front of the house. In the barn are comfortable, well-fed
stock, horses and cows. This is no fancy picture, but one from life,
and typical of 20,000 others. Each homestead in turn has the same
experience, and it is no wonder, therefore, when the settlement,
properly laid out and organized, grows into municipal existence, that
every one speaks kindly of, and acts kindly towards, his neighbour. A
visitor, till he understands the reason, is surprised at the intimacy
of households. But when he does understand it, ought not his surprise
to give place to admiration?

Not less conspicuous is the uniform sincerity in religion. A school
and meeting-house is to be found in every settlement, even though
there may be only half-a-dozen families, and besides the regular
attendance of the people at weekly services, the private prayers of
each household are as punctual as their meals. In these prayers, after
the ordinary generalities, the head of the house usually prays for
all the authorities of the Church, from the President downwards, for
the local authorities, for the Church as a body, and the missionaries
abroad, for his household and its guest, for the United States, and for
Congress, and for all the world that feels kindly towards Mormonism.
But quite apart from the matter of their prayers, their manner is very
striking, and the scene in a humble house, when a large family meets
for prayer--and half the members, finding no article of furniture
unoccupied for the orthodox position of devotion, drop into attitudes
of natural reverence, kneeling in the middle of the floor--appeals very
strongly to the eye of those accustomed to the stereotyped piety of a
more advanced civilization.

One more conspicuous feature of Mormon life is sobriety. I have been
the guest of some fifty different households, and only once I was
offered even beer. That exception was in a Danish household, where
the wife brewed her own "ol"--an opaque beverage of home-fermented
wheat and home-grown hops--as a curiosity curious, as an "indulgence"
doubtful, as a regular drink impossible. On no other occasion was
anything but tea, coffee, milk, or water offered. And even tea and
coffee, being discouraged by the Church, are but seldom drunk. As a
heathen outsider I deplored my beer, and was grateful for coffee; but
the rest of the household, in almost every instance, drank water.
Tobacco is virtually unused. It is used, but so seldom that it does not
affect my statement. The spittoon, therefore, though in every room, is
behind the door, or in a corner under a piece of furniture. In case
it should be needed, it is there--like the shot-gun upstairs--but its
being called into requisition would be a family event.

No, let their enemies say what they will, the Mormon settlements are
each of them to-day a refutation of the libel that the Mormons are not
sincere in their antipathy to strong drink and tobacco. That individual
Mormons drink and smoke proves nothing, except that they do it. For the
great majority of the Mormons, they are strictly sober. I know it to my
great inconvenience.

Is it possible then that the American people, so generous in their
impulses, so large-hearted in action, have been misled as to the
true character of the Mormon "problem"? At first sight this may seem
impossible. A whole people, it will be said, cannot have been misled.
But I think a general misapprehension is quite within the possibilities.

Whence have the public derived their opinions about Mormonism? From
anti-Mormons only. I have ransacked the literature of the subject,
and yet I really could not tell any one where to go for an impartial
book about Mormonism later in date than Burton's "City of the
Saints," published in 1862. Burton, it is well known, wrote as a man
of wide travel and liberal education--catholic, therefore, on all
matters religious, and generous in his views of ethical and social
obliquities, sympathetic, consistent, and judicial. It is no wonder,
then, that Mormons remember the distinguished traveller, in spite of
his candour, with the utmost kindness. But put Burton on one side,
and I think I can defy any one to name another book about the Mormons
worthy of honest respect. From that truly awful book, "The History
of the Saints," published by one Bennett (even an anti-Mormon has
styled him "the greatest rascal that ever came to the West") in 1842,
down to Stenhouse's in 1873, there is not, to my knowledge, a single
Gentile work before the public that is not utterly unreliable from
its distortion of facts. Yet it is from these books--for there are no
others--that the American public has acquired nearly all its ideas
about the people of Utah.

The Mormons themselves are most foolishly negligent of the power of
the press, and of the immense value in forming public opinion of a
free use of type. They affect to be indifferent to the clamour of the
world, but when this clamour leads to legislative action against them,
they turn round petulantly with the complaint that there is a universal
conspiracy against them. It does not seem to occur to them that their
misfortunes are partly due to their own neglect of the very weapons
which their adversaries have used so diligently, so unscrupulously, and
so successfully.

They do not seem to understand that a public contradiction given to
a public calumny goes some way towards correcting the mischief done,
or that by anticipating malicious versions of events they could as
often as not get an accurate statement before the public, instead of
an inaccurate one. But enterprise in advertisement has been altogether
on the side of the anti-Mormons. The latter never lose an opportunity
of throwing in a bad word, while the Mormons content themselves with
"rounding their shoulders," as they are so fond of saying, and putting
a denial of the libel into the local News. They say they are so
accustomed to abuse that they are beginning not to care about it--which
is the old, stupid self-justification of the apathetic. The fascination
of a self-imposed martyrdom seems too great for them, and, like flies
when they are being wrapped up into parcels by the spider for greater
convenience of transportation to its larder, they sing chastened
canticles about the inevitability of cobwebs and the deplorable
rapacity of spiders.

"I can assure you," said one of them, "it would be of no use trying to
undeceive the public. You cannot make a whistle out of a pig's tail,
you know."

"Nonsense," I replied. "You can--for I have seen a whistle made out of
a pig's tail. And it is in a shop in Chicago to this day!"

It will be understood, then, that the Mormons have made no adequate
efforts either in books or the press to meet their antagonists. They
prefer to allow cases against them to go by default, and content
themselves with privately filing pleas in defence which would have
easily acquitted them had they gone before the public. America,
therefore, hearing only one side of the case, and so much of it, is
certainly not to be blamed for drawing its conclusions from the only
facts before it. It cannot be expected to know that three or four
individuals, all them by their own confession "Mormon-eaters," have
from the first been the purveyors of nearly all the distorted facts it
receives. Seeing the same thing said in many different directions, the
general public naturally conclude that a great number of persons are in
agreement as to the facts.

But the exigencies of journalism which admit, for instance, of the
same correspondent being a local contributor to two or three score
newspapers of widely differing views in politics and religion, are
unknown to them. And they are therefore unaware that the indignation
so widely printed throughout America has its source in the personal
animosity of three or four individuals only who are bitterly sectarian,
and that these men are actually personally ignorant of the country
they live in, have seldom talked to a Mormon, and have never visited
Mormonism outside Salt Lake City. These men write of the "squalid
poverty" of Mormons, of their obscene brutality, of their unceasing
treason towards the United States, of their blasphemous repudiation of
the Bible, without one particle of information on the subject, except
such as they gather from the books and writings of men whom they ought
to know are utterly unworthy of credit, or from the verbal calumnies
of apostates. And what the evidence of apostates is worth history has
long ago told us. I am now stating facts; and I, who have lived among
the Mormons and with them, who have seen them in their homes, rich
and poor; have joined in their worship, public and private; who have
constantly conversed with them, men, women, and children; Who have
visited their out-lying settlements, large and small--as no Gentile
has ever done before me--can assure my readers that every day of my
residence increased my regret at the misrepresentation these people
have suffered.

Footnotes:

1. Except, of course, General Kane.



CHAPTER XX.

DOWN THE ONTARIO MINE.

"Been down a mine! What on earth did you do that for?" said the elder
Sheridan to the younger.

"Oh, just to say that I had done it," was the reply.

"To say that you had done it! Good gracious! Couldn't you have said
that without going down a mine?"

No, Mr. Sheridan, you could not; at least not in these latter days. Too
many people do it now for the impostor to remain undiscovered. Take my
own case, for instance. I had often read descriptions of mine descents,
and thought I knew how it happened, and how ore was got out. But no one
ever told me that you had to go paddling about in water half the time,
or that mines were excavated upwards. Now, then, if I had tried to
pretend that I had been down a mine I should have been promptly found
out, by my ignorance of the two first facts that strike one. Again, it
is very simple work imagining the descent of a "shaft" in a "cage."
But unfortunately a cage is only a platform to stand on without either
sides or top, and not, therefore, such a cage as one would buy to keep
a bird in, or as would keep a bird in if one did buy it. Nor, without
actually experiencing it, could anybody guess that the first sensation
of whizzing down a pipe, say 800 feet, is that of seeming to lose all
your specific gravity, and that the next (after you had partially
collected your faculties) is that you are stationary yourself, but that
the dripping timbers that line the shaft are all flying upwards past
you like sparks up a chimney.

Mines, of course, differ from one another just as the men who go down
them do, but as far as I myself am concerned all mines are puddly
places, and the sensations of descent are ridiculous--for I have only
been down two in my life, and both "demned, damp, moist, unpleasant"
places. But the mine to which I now refer is the "Ontario," in Utah,
which may be said, in the preposterous vernacular of the West, to be
a "terrible fine" mine, or, in other words, "a boss mine," that is to
say, "a daisy."

As for daisies, anything that greatly takes the fancy or evokes
especial admiration is called a daisy. Thus I heard a very much
respected Mormon Bishop, who is also a director of a railway, described
by an enthusiastic admirer as "a daisy!"

Finding myself in Park "City" one evening--it is a mining camp
dependent chiefly upon the Ontario--I took a walk up the street with
a friend. Every other house appeared to be a saloon, with a doctor's
residence sandwiched in between--a significantly convenient arrangement
perhaps in the days when there was no "Protective Committee" in Park
City, but--so I am told--without much practical benefit to the public
in these quiet days, when law-abiding citizens do their own hanging,
without troubling the county sheriff, who lives somewhere on the other
side of a distance. The result of this is that bad characters do not
stay long enough in Park City now to get up free fights, and make work
for the doctors. The Protective Committee invites them to "git" as soon
as they arrive, and, to do them credit, they do "git."

However, as I was saying, I took a walk with a friend along the street,
and presently became aware above me, high up on the hillside, of a
great collection of buildings, with countless windows (I mean that
I did not try to count them) lit up, and looking exactly like some
theatrical night-scene. These were the mills of the Ontario, which work
night and day, and seven days to the week, a perpetual flame like that
of the Zoroastrians, and as carefully kept alive by stalwart stokers as
ever was Vestal altar-fire by the girl-priestesses of Rome. It was a
picturesque sight, with the huge hills looming up black behind, and the
few surviving pine-trees showing out dimly against the darkening sky.

Next morning I went up to the mine--and down it.

Having costumed myself in garments that made getting dirty a perfect
luxury, I was taken to the shaft. Now, I had expected to see an
unfathomably black hole in the ground with a rope dangling down it,
but instead of that I found myself in a spacious boarded shed, with
a huge wheel standing at one end and a couple of iron uprights with
a cross-bar standing up from the floor at the other. Round the wheel
was coiled an enormous length of a six-inch steel-wire band, and the
disengaged end of the band, after passing over a beam, was fastened
to the cross-bar above mentioned. On the bridge of the wheel stood an
engineer, the arbiter of fates, who is perpetually unwinding victims
down from stage to stage of the Inferno, and winding up the redeemed
from limbo to limbo. Having propitiated him by an affectation of
intelligence as to the machinery which he controlled, we took our
places under the cross-bar, between the stanchions, and suddenly the
floor--as innocent-looking and upright-minded a bit of boarded floor
as you could wish to stand on--gave way beneath us, and down we shot
apud inferos, like the devils in "Der Freischütz." We had our lamps in
our hands, and they gave just light enough for me to see the dripping
wooden walls of the shaft flashing past, and then I felt myself
becoming lighter and lighter--a mere butterfly--imponderable. But it
doesn't take many seconds to fall down 800 feet, and long before I had
expected it I found we were "at the bottom."

Our explorations then began; and very queer it all was, with the
perpetual gushing of springs from the rock, and the bubble and splash
of the waters as they ran along on either side the narrow tunnels; the
meetings at corners with little cars being pushed along by men who
looked, as they bent low to their work, like those load-rolling beetles
that Egypt abounds in; the machinery for pumping, so massive that it
seemed much more likely that it was found where it stood, the vestiges
of a long-past subterranean civilization, than that it had been brought
down there by the men of these degenerate days; the sudden endings of
the tunnels which the miners were driving along the vein, with a man
at each ending, his back bent to fit into the curve which he had made
in the rock, and reminding one of the frogs that science tells us are
found at times fitted into holes in the middle of stones; the climbing
up hen-roost ladders from tunnel to tunnel, from one darkness into
another; the waiting at different spots till "that charge had been
blasted," and the dull, deadened roar of the explosion had died away;
the watching the solitary miners at their work picking and thumping at
the discoloured strips of dark rock that looked to the uninitiated only
like water-stained, mildewy accidents in the general structure, but
which, in reality, was silver, and yielding, it might be, $1600 to the
ton!

"This is all very rich ore," said my guide, kicking a heap that I was
standing on. I got off it at once, reverentially.

But reverence for the Mother of the Dollar gradually dies out,
for everything about you, above you, beneath you, is silver or
silverish--dreadful rubbish to look at, it is true, but with the spirit
of the great metal in it all none the less; that fairy Argentine
who builds palaces for men, and gives them, if they choose, all the
pleasures of the world, and the leisure wherein to enjoy them. And
there they stood, these latter-day Cyclops, working away like the
gnomes of the Hartz Mountains, or the entombed artificers of the
Bear-Kings of Dardistan, with their lanterns glowing at the end of
their tunnels like the Kanthi gem which Shesh, the fabled snake-god,
has provided for his gloomy empire of mines under the Nagas' hills.
Useless crystals glittered on every side, as if they were jewels, and
the water dripping down the sides glistened as if it was silver, but
the pretty hypocrisy was of no avail. For though the ore itself was
dingy and ugly and uninviting, the ruthless pick pursued it deeper
and deeper into its retreat, and only struck the harder the darker
and uglier it got. It reminded me, watching the miner at his work,
of the fairy story where the prince in disguise has to kill the lady
of his love in order to release her from the enchantments which have
transformed her, and how the wicked witch makes her take shape after
shape to escape the resolute blows of the desperate lover. But at last
his work is accomplished, and the ugly thing stands before him in all
the radiant beauty of her true nature.

And it is a long process, and a costly one, before the lumps of heavy
dirt which the miner pecks out of the inside of a hill are transformed
into those hundredweight blocks of silver bullion which the train from
Park City carries every morning of the year into Salt Lake City. From
first to last it is pretty much as follows. Remember I am not writing
for those who live inside mines; very much on the contrary. I am
writing for those who have never been down a mine in their lives, but
who may care to read an unscientific description of "mining," and the
Ontario mine in particular.

In 1872 a couple of men made a hole in the ground, and finding silver
ore in it offered the hole for sale at $30,000. A clever man, R. C.
Chambers by name, happened to come along, and liking the look of the
hole, joined a friend in the purchase of it. The original diggers thus
pocketed $30,000 for a few days' work, and no doubt thought they had
done a good thing. But alas! that hole in the ground which they were
so glad to get rid of ten years ago now yields every day a larger sum
in dollars than they sold it for! The new owners of the hole, which
was christened "The Ontario Mine," were soon at work, but instead of
following them through the different stages of development, it is
enough to describe what that hole looks like and produces to-day.

A shaft, then, has been sunk plumb down into the mountain for 900
feet, and from this shaft, at every 100 feet as you go down, you find
a horizontal tunnel running off to right and left. If you stop in your
descent at any one of these "stages" and walk through the tunnel--water
rushing all the way over your feet, and the vaulted rock dripping
over-head--you will find that a line of rails has been laid down along
it, and that the sides and roofs are strongly supported by timbers
of great thickness. These timbers are necessary to prevent, in the
first place, the rock above from crushing down through the roof of the
tunnel, and, in the next, from squeezing in its sides, for the rock
every now and then swells and the sides of the tunnels bulge in. The
rails are, of course, for the cars which the miners fill with ore, and
push from the end of the tunnel to the "stage." A man there signals
by a bell which communicates with the engineer at the big wheel in
the shed I have already spoken of, and there being a regular code of
signals, the engineer knows at once at which stage the car is waiting,
and how far therefore he is to let the cage down. Up goes the car with
its load of ore into the daylight,--and then its troubles begin.

But meanwhile let us stay a few minutes more in the mine. Walking
along any one of the main horizontal tunnels, we come at intervals to
a ladder, and going up one of them we find that a stope, or smaller
gallery, is being run parallel with the tunnel in which we are
walking, and of course (as it follows the same direction of the ore),
immediately over that tunnel, so that the roof of the tunnel is the
floor of the stope. The stopes are just wide enough for a man to work
in easily, and are as high as he can reach easily with his pickaxe,
about seven feet. If you walk along one of these stopes you come to
another ladder, and find it leads to another stope above, and going
up this you find just the same again, until you become aware that the
whole mountain above you is pierced throughout the length of the ore
vein by a series of seven-foot galleries lying exactly parallel one
above the other, and separated only by a sufficient thickness of pine
timber to make a solid floor for each. But at every hundred feet, as I
have said, there comes a main tunnel, down to which all the produce of
the minor galleries above it is shot down by "shoots," loaded into cars
and pushed along to the "stage." But silver ore is not the only thing
that the Company gets out of its mine, for unfortunately the mountain
in which the Ontario is located is full of springs, and the miner's
pick is perpetually, therefore, letting the water break into the
tunnels, and in such volume, too, that I am informed it costs as much
to rid the works of the water as to get out the silver! Streams gurgle
along all the tunnels, and here and there ponderous bulkheads have been
put up to keep the water and the loosened rock from falling in. Pumps
of tremendous power are at work at several levels throwing the water up
towards the surface--one of these at the 800-foot level throwing 1500
gallons a minute up to the 500-foot level.

Following a car-load of ore, we find it, having reached the surface,
being loaded into waggons, in which it is carried down the hill to
the mills, weighed, and then shot down into a gigantic bin--in which,
by the way, the Company always keeps a reserve of ore sufficient
to keep the mills in full work for two years. From this hour, life
becomes a burden to the ore, for it is hustled about from machine
to machine without the least regard to its feelings. No sooner is
it out of the waggon than a brutal crusher begins smashing it up
into small fragments, the result of this meanness being that the ore
is able to tumble through a screen into cars that are waiting for
it down below. These rush upstairs with it again and pour it into
"hoppers," which, being in the conspiracy too, begin at once to spill
it into gigantic drying cylinders that are perpetually revolving over
a terrific furnace fire, and the ore, now dust, comes streaming out
as dry as dry can be, is caught in cars and wheeled off to batteries
where forty stampers, stamping like one, pound and smash it as if they
took a positive delight in it. There is an intelligent, deliberate
determination about this fearful stamping which makes one feel almost
afraid of the machinery. Some pieces, however, actually manage to
escape sufficient mashing up and slip away with the rest down into
a "screw conveyor," but the poor wretches are soon found out, for
the fiendish screw conveyor empties itself on to a screen, through
which all the pulverized ore goes shivering down, but the guilty
lumps still remaining are carried back by another ruthless machine
to those detestable stamps again. They cannot dodge them. For these
machines are all in the plot together. Or rather, they are the honest
workmen of good masters, and they are determined that the work shall
be thoroughly done, and that not a single lump of ore shall be allowed
to skulk so without any one to look after them these cylinders and
stampers, hoppers and dryers, elevators and screens go on with their
work all day, all night, relentless in their duty and pitiless to the
ore. Let a lump dodge them as it may, it gets no good by it, for the
one hands it over to the other, just as constables hand over a thief
they have caught, and it goes its rounds, again and again, till the end
eventually overtakes it, and it falls through the screen in a fine dust.

For its sins it is now called "pulp," and starts off on a second tour
of suffering--for these Inquisitors of iron and steel, these blind,
brutal Cyclops-machines, have only just begun, as it were, their fun
with their victim. Its tortures are now to be of a more searching
and refined description. As it falls through the screen, another
screw-conveyor catches sight of it and hurries it along a revolving
tube into which salt is being perpetually fed from a bin overhead--this
salt, allow me to say for the benefit of those as ignorant as myself,
is "necessary as a chloridizer"--and thus mixed up with the stranger,
falls into the power of a hydraulic elevator, which carries it up forty
feet to the top of a roasting furnace and deliberately spills the
mixture into it! Looking into the solid flame, I appreciated for the
first time in my life the courage of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

The mixture which fell in at the top bluish-grey comes out at the
bottom yellowish-brown--I only wonder at its coming out all--and is
raked into heaps that have a wicked, lurid colour and give out such
fierce short flames of brilliant tints, and such fierce, short blasts
of a poisonous gas, that I could not help thinking of the place where
bad men go to, and wondering if a Dante could not get a hint or two
for improving his Inferno by a visit to the Ontario roasting-furnace.
The men who stir these heaps use rakes with prodigious handles, and
wear wet sponges over their mouths and noses, and as I watched them I
remembered the poet's devils who keep on prodding up the damned and
raking them about over the flames.

But the ore submits without any howling or gnashing of teeth, and is
dragged off dumb, and soused into great churns, kept at a boiling heat,
in which quicksilver is already lying waiting, and the ore and the
quicksilver are then churned up together by revolving wheels inside the
pans, till the contents look like huge caldrons of bubbling chocolate.
After some hours they are drained off into settlers and cold water is
let in upon the mess, and lo! silver as bright as the quicksilver with
which it is mixed comes dripping out through the spout at the bottom
into canvas bags.

Much of the quicksilver drips through the canvas back into the pans,
and the residue, silver mixed with quicksilver, makes a cold, heavy,
white paste called "amalgam," which is carried off in jars to the
retorts. Into these it is thrown, and while lying there the quicksilver
goes on dripping away from the silver, and after a time the fires are
lighted and the retort is sealed up. The intense heat that is obtained
volatilizes the quicksilver; but this mercurial vapour is caught as it
is escaping at the top of the retort, again condensed into its solid
form, and again used to mix with fresh silver ore. Its old companion,
the silver, goes on melting inside the retort all the time, till at
last when the fires are allowed to cool down, it is found in irregular
lumps of a pink-looking substance. These lumps are then taken to the
crucibles, and passing from them, molten and refined, fall into moulds,
each holding about a hundred-weight of bullion.

And all this bother and fuss, reader, to obtain these eight or ten
blocks of metal!

True, but then that metal is silver, and with one single day's produce
from the Ontario Mine in the bank to his credit a man might live at his
leisure in London, like a nobleman in Paris, or like a prince among the
princes of Eulenspiegel-Wolfenbuttel-Gutfurnichts.



CHAPTER XXI.

FROM UTAH INTO NEVADA.

    Rich and ugly Nevada--Leaving Utah--The gift of the
    Alfalfa--Through a lovely country to Ogden--The great
    food-devouring trick--From Mormon to Gentile: a sudden
    contrast--The son of a cinder--Is the red man of no use at
    all?--The papoose's papoose--Children all of one family.

IT is a far cry from the City of the Saints to the city of the
Celestials, for Nevada stretches all its hideous length between them,
and thus keeps apart the two American problems of the day--pigtails
and polygamy. But mere length in miles is not all that goes to make a
journey seem long, for dreariness of landscape stretches every yard to
six feet, and turns honest miles into rascally versts, or elongates
them into the still more infamous "kos" of the East, the so-called
mile, which seems to lengthen out at the other end as you travel along
it, and about nightfall to lose the other end altogether. And Nevada is
certainly dreary enough for anything. It is abominably rich, I know.
There is probably more filthy lucre in it per acre (in a crude state,
of course) than in any other state in the Union, and more dollars piled
up in those ghastly mountains than in any other range in America. But,
as a fellow-passenger remarked, "There's a pile of land in Nevada that
don't amount to much," and it is just this part of Nevada that the
traveller by railway sees.

"That hill over there is full of silver," said a stranger to me, by way
of propitiating my opinion.

"Is it" I said, "the brute." I really couldn't help it. I had no
ill-feeling towards the hill, and if it had asked a favour of me,
I believe I should have granted it as readily as any one. But its
repulsive appearance was against it, and the idea of its being full of
silver stirred my indignation. I grudged so ugly a cloud its silver
lining, and like the sailor in the Summer Palace at Pekin felt moved to
insult it. The sailor I refer to was in one of the courts of the palace
looking about for plunder. It did not occur to his weather-beaten,
nautical intelligence that everything about him was moulded in solid
silver. He thought it was lead. A huge dragon stood in the corner
of the room, and the atrocity of its expression exasperated Jack so
acutely that he smote it with his cutlass, and lo! out of the monster's
wound poured an ichor of silver coinage.

"Who'd have thought it!" said Jack, "the ugly devil!"

Nevada, moreover, lies under the disadvantage of having on one side of
it the finest portion of California, on the other the finest portion
of Utah, and sandwiched between two such Beauties, such a Beast
naturally looks its worst. For the northern angle of Utah is by far
the most fertile part of the territory, possessing, in patches, some
incomparable meadows, and corn-lands of wondrous fertility. As compared
with the prodigious agricultural and pastoral wealth of such states as
Missouri, Illinois, or Ohio, the Cache Valleys and Bear Valleys of Utah
seem of course insignificant enough; but at present I am comparing them
only with the rest of poor Utah, and with ugly, wealthy Nevada.

Starting from Salt Lake City northwards, the road lies through suburbs
of orchards and gardens, many of them smothered in red and yellow
roses, out on to the levels of the Great Valley. Here, beyond the
magic circle of the Water-wizard, there are patches of fen-lands still
delightful to wild-fowl, and patches of alkali blistering in the sun,
but all about them stretch wide meadows of good grazing-ground, where
the cattle, good Devon breed many of them, and here and there a Jersey,
loiter about, and bright fields of lucerne, or alfalfa, just purpling
into blossom and haunted by whole nations of bees and tribes of yellow
butterflies. What a gift this lucerne has been to Utah! Indeed, as the
Mormons say, the territory could hardly have held its own had it not
been for this wonderful plant. Once get it well started (and it will
grow apparently anywhere) the "alfalfa" strikes its roots ten, fifteen,
twenty feet into the ground, and defies the elements. More than this,
it becomes aggressive, and, like the white races, begins to encroach
upon, dominate over, and finally extinguish the barbarian weeds, its
wild neighbours.

Scientific experiments with other plants have taught us that vegetables
wage war with each other, under principles and with tactics, curiously
similar to those of human communities.

When a strong plant advancing its frontiers comes upon a nation of
feeble folk, it simply falls upon it pell-mell, relying upon mere brute
strength to crush opposition. But when two plants, equally hardy, come
in contact, and the necessity for more expansion compels them to fight,
they bring into action all the science and skill of old gladiators
and German war-professors. They push out skirmishers, and draw them
in, throw out flanking parties, plant outposts, race for commanding
points, manoeuvre each other out of corners, cut off each others'
communications with the water, sap and mine--in fact go through all the
artifices of civilized war. If they find themselves well-matched, they
eventually make an alliance, and mingle peacefully with each other,
dividing the richer spots equally, and going halves in the water.
But as a rule one gives way to the other, accepts its dominion, and
gradually accepts a subordinate place or even extirpation.

Now this lucerne is one of the fightingest plants that grows. It is the
Norwegian rat among the vegetables, the Napoleon of the weeds. Nothing
stops it. If it comes upon a would-be rival, it either punches its head
and walks over it, or it sits down to besiege it, drives its own roots
under the enemy, and compels it to capitulate by starvation. Fences and
such devices cannot of course keep it within bounds, so the lucerne
overflows its limits at every point, comes down the railway bank,
sprouts up in tufts on the track, and getting across into the Scythian
barbarism of the opposite hill-side, advances as with a Macedonian
phalanx to conquest and universal monarchy. Three times a year can the
farmer crop it, and there is no fodder in the world that beats it. No
wonder then that Utah encourages this admirable adventurer. In time it
will become the Lucerne State.

And so, passing through fields of lucerne, we reach the Hot Springs.
From a cleft in a rock comes gushing out an ample stream of nearly
boiling water as clear as diamonds, and so heavily charged with mineral
that the sulphuretted air, combined with the heat, is sometimes
intolerable, while the ground over which the water pours becomes in a
few weeks thickly carpeted with a lovely weed-like growth of purest
malachite green. Passing across the road, from its first pool under
the rock, the stream spreads itself out into the Hot Springs Lake,
where the water soon assimilates in temperature to the atmosphere, but
possesses, for some reason known to the birds, a peculiar attraction
for wild-fowl, which congregate in great numbers about it. Where it
issues from the rock no vegetable of course can grow in it, and there
is a rim all round its edge about a foot in width where the grass and
weeds lie brown and dead, suffocated by the fumes. The fungoid-like
growth at the bottom of the pool exactly resembles a vegetable, but
is as purely mineral, though sub-aqueous, as the stalactites on a
cave-roof.

And so, on again through a wilderness of lucerne, with a broad
riband of carnation-coloured phlox retreating before its advancing
borders--past a perpetual succession of cottages coming at intervals
to a head in delightful farming hamlets of the true Mormon type--past
innumerable orchards, and here and there intervals of wild vegetation,
willows, and cotton-wood, with beds of blue iris, and brakes of wild
pink roses (such a confusion of beauty!) among which the birds and
butterflies seem to hold perpetual holiday.

Then Salt Lake comes in sight, lying along under the mountains on the
left, and on the right the Wasatch range closes in, with the upper
slopes all misty with grey clouds of sage-brush, and the lower vivid
with lusty lucerne. Each settlement is in turn a delightful repetition
of its predecessor, meadow and orchard and corn-land alternating, with
the same pleasant features of wild life, flocks of crimson-winged or
yellow-throated birds wheeling round the willow copses, or skimming
across the meadows, bitterns tumbling out from among the reeds, doves
darting from tree to tree, butterflies of exquisite species fluttering
among the beds of flowers, and overhead in the sky, floating on
observant wings, the hawk--one of those significant touches of Nature
that redeems a country-side from Arcadian mawkishness, and throws into
an over-sweet landscape just that dash of sin and suffering that lemons
it pleasantly to the taste.

Round the corner yonder lies Ogden, one of the most promising towns
of all the West, and as we approach it the great expanses of meadow
stretching down to the lake and the wide alfalfa levels give place
to a barren sage veldt, where the sunflower still retains ancestral
dominion, and the jackass rabbits flap their ears at each other
undisturbed by agriculture or by grazing stock. Nestling back into a
nook of the hills which rise up steeply behind it, and show plainly on
the front their old water-line of "Lake Bonneville" (of which the Great
Salt Lake is the shrunken miserable relict), lies a pretty settlement,
cosily muffed up in clover and fruit trees, and then beyond it, across
another interval of primeval sage, comes into view the white cupola of
the Ogden courthouse.

Ogden is the meeting-point of the northern and southern Utah lines of
rail, and, more important still, of the Union Pacific and the Central
Pacific also. As a "junction town," therefore, it enjoys a position
which has already made it prosperous, and which promises it great
wealth in the near future. Nature too has been very kind, for the
climate is one of the healthiest (if statistics may be believed) in the
world; and wood and water, and a fertile soil, are all in abundance.
Fortunately also, the Mormons selected the site and laid it out so that
the ground-plan is spacious, the roadways are ample, the shade-trees
profuse, and the drainage good. Its central school is, perhaps, the
leading one in the territory, while in manufactures and industry
it will probably some day outstrip Salt Lake City. For the visitor
who does not care about statistics, Ogden has another attraction as
the centre of a very beautiful canyon country, and excursions can
be made in a single day that will give him as exhaustive an idea of
the beauties of western hill scenery, as he will ever obtain by far
more extended trips. The Ogden and Weber canyons alone exhaust such
landscapes, but if the tourist has the time and the will, he may wander
away up into the Wasatch range, past Ogden valley and many lovely bits
of scenery, towards Bear Valley. But for myself, having seen nearly all
the canyons of Utah and many of Colorado, I confess that the Weber and
Ogden would have sufficed for all mere sight-seeing purposes.

It was in the Ogden refreshment-room, waiting for the train for San
Francisco, that I saw a performance that filled me with astonishment
and dismay. It was a man eating his dinner. And let me here remark,
with all possible courtesy, that the American on his travels is the
most reprehensible eater I have ever seen. In the first place, the
knives are purposely made blunt--the back and the front of the blade
being often of the same "sharpness"--to enable him to eat gravy with
it. The result is that the fork (which ought to be used simply to
hold meat steady on the plate while being cut with the knife) has to
be used with great force to wrench off fragments of food. The object
of the two instruments is thus materially abused, for he holds the
meat down with the knife and tears it into bits with his fork! Now,
reader, don't say no. For I have been carefully studying travelling
Americans at their food (all over the West at any rate), and what I say
is strictly correct. This abuse of knife and fork then necessitates
an extraordinary amount of elbow-room, for in forcing apart a tough
slice of beef the elbows have to stick out as square as possible,
and the consequence is, as the proprietor of a hotel told me, only
four Americans can eat in a space in which six Englishmen will dine
comfortably. The latter, when feeding, keep their elbows to their
sides; the former square them out on the line of the shoulders, and at
right angles to their sides. Having thus got the travelling American
into position, watch him consuming his food! He has ordered a dozen
"portions" of as many eatables, and the whole of his meal, after the
detestable fashion of the "eating-houses" at which travellers are fed,
is put before him at once. To eat the dozen or so different things
which he has ordered, he has only one knife and fork and one tea-spoon.
Bending over the table, he sticks his fork into a pickled gherkin, and
while munching this casts one rapid hawk-like glance over the spread
viands, and then proceeds to eat. Mehercule! what a sight it is! He
dabs his knife into the gravy of the steak, picks up with his fork a
piece of bacon, and while the one is going up to his mouth, the other
is reaching out for something else. He never apparently chews his food,
but dabs and pecks at the dishes one after the other with a rapidity
which (merely as a juggling trick) might be performed in London to
crowded houses every day, and with an impartiality that, considered as
"dining," is as savage as any meal of Red Indians or of Basutos. Dab,
dab, peck, peck, grunt, growl, snort! The spoon strikes in every now
and then, and a quick sucking-up noise announces the disappearance of a
mouthful of huckleberries on the top of a bit of bacon, or a spoonful
of custard-pie on the heels of a radish. It is perfectly prodigious.
It defies coherent description. But how on earth does he swallow?
Every now and then he shuts his eyes, and strains his throat; this,
I suppose, is when he swallows, for I have seen children getting rid
of cake with the same sort of spasm. Yet the rapidity with which he
shovels in his food is a wonder to me, seeing that he has not got any
"pouch" like the monkey or the pelican. Does he keep his miscellaneous
food in a "crop" like a pigeon, or a preliminary stomach like the cow,
and "chew the cud" afterwards at his leisure? I confess I am beaten by
it. The mixture of his food, if it pleases him, does not annoy me, for
if a man likes to eat mouthfuls of huckleberries, bacon, apple-pie,
pickled mackerel, peas, mutton, gherkins, oysters, radishes, tomatoes,
custard, and poached eggs (this is a bona-fide meal copied from my
note-book on the spot) in indiscriminate confusion, it has nothing to
do with me. But what I want to know is, why the travelling American
does not stop to chew his food; or why, as is invariably the case, he
will despatch in five minutes a meal for which he has half an hour set
specially apart? He falls upon his food as if he were demented with
hunger, as if he were a wild thing of prey tearing victims that he
hated into pieces; and when the hideous deed is done, he rushes out
from the scene of massacre with a handful of toothpicks, and leans idly
against the door-post, as if time were without limit or end! The whole
thing is a mystery to me. When I first came into the country I used to
waste many precious moments in gazing at "the fine confused feeding" of
my neighbours at the table, and waiting to see them choke. But I have
given that up now. I plod systematically and deliberately through my
one dish, content to find myself always the last at the table, with a
tumult of empty platters scattered all about me. Nothing can choke the
travelling American. In the meantime, I wish that young man of Ogden
would exhibit his great eating trick in London. It beats Maskelyne and
Cook into fits.

From Ogden northwards the road lies past perpetual cottage-farms,
separated only by orchards or fields, and clustering at intervals
into pleasant villages, where the people are all busy gathering in
their lucerne crops. The same profusion of wild-flowers, and exquisite
rose-brakes, the same abundance of bird and insect life is conspicuous.

But gradually our road bears away westward from the hills, leaving
cultivation and cottages to follow the line of irrigation along their
lower slopes, and while to our right the narrow-gauge line runs
northward up into the Cache Valley, the granary of Utah, we trend away
to the left. The northern end of the Salt Lake comes in sight, and the
track running for a while close to its side gives me a last look at
this sheet of wonderful water.

I was sorry to see the last of it, for I was sorry to leave Utah and
the kind-hearted, simple, hard-working Mormon people. But the Lake
gradually comes to a point, dwindles out into a marsh, and is gone, and
as we speed away across levels of dreary alkaline ground, we can only
recall its site by the wild duck streaming across to settle for the
night in the reeds that grow by its edges.

Away from Mormon industry, the sage-brush flourishes like green
bay-trees. To the east, the line of white-walled cottages speaks of a
civilization which we are leaving behind us. To the west, the dreary
mountains of Nevada already herald a region of barren desolation. And
so the sun begins to set, and in the dim moth-time, as the mists begin
to blur the outlines of Antelope Island in the Salt Lake, the small
round-faced owls come out upon the railway fencing and chuckle to each
other, and crossing the Bear River, all ruddy with the sunset, we see
the night-hawks skimming the water in chase of the creatures of the
twilight.

And so to Corinne, ghastly Corinne, a Gentile failure on the very
skirts of Mormon success. It had once a great carrying-trade, for being
at the terminus of the Utah Railway, Montana depended upon it for its
supplies, and bitterly had Montana cause to regret it, for the Corinne
freight-carriers (I wish I could remember their expressive slang name)
seemed to think that railway enterprise must always terminate at
Corinne, and so they carried just what they chose, at the price they
chose, and when they chose. But the railway ran past them one fine day,
and so now there is Corinne, stranded high and dry, as discreditable
a settlement as ever men put together. Without any plan, treeless and
roadless, the scattered hamlet of crazy-looking shanties stands half
the year in drifting dust and half the year in sticky mud, and the
Mormons point the finger of scorn at the place the Gentiles used to
boast of. And Corinne seems to strike the keynote of the succeeding
country, for cultivation ceases and habitations are not on the desolate
plain we enter. And so to Promontory and then darkness.

We awake to find ourselves still in calamitous Nevada. What heaps of
British gold have been sunk in those ugly hills in the hope of getting
up American silver!

But here is Halleck, a government post, and soldiers from the barracks
are lounging about in uniforms that make them look like butcher-boys,
and with a drowsy gait that makes one suspect them to be burthened
with the saddening load of yesterday's whisky. Then, after an interval
of desert, we cross the Humboldt river, thick with the mud of melting
snows, and, snaking across a plain warted over with ant-hills, arrive
at Elko.

It is possible that Allah in his mercy may forgive Elko the offal which
it put before us for breakfast. For myself, mere humanity forbids me to
forgive it. But Elko was otherwise of interest. A waiter, very black,
and, in proportion to his nigritude, insolent, had triumphed over my
unconcealed disgust with my food. Yet I turned to him civilly and said,
"Isn't there a warm spring here which is worth going to see?"

"No," said the negro, "our spring been burned up!"

"Burned up!" I exclaimed in astonishment; "the spring been burned up!"

"Yes," said the abominable one, "burned up. Everybody know dat."

"Was your mother there?" I asked courteously, pretending not to be
exasperated by the blackamoor.

"My mother? No. My mother's--"

"Ah!" I replied, "I thought she might have been burned up at the same
time, for you look like the son of a cinder."

My sally--mean effort that it was--was a complete triumph, and I left
Ham squashed. It proved, of course, that it was the wooden shanty at
the spring that had been burned down, but in any case it was too far
off for us to go to see. So we consoled ourselves with the Indians,
who always gather on the platform at Elko, in the assurance of begging
or showing their papooses to some purpose. Nor were they wrong. I
paid a quarter to see "the papoose," and got more than my money's
worth in hearing this poor brown woman talking to her child the same
sweet nursery nonsense that my own wife talks to mine. And the papoose
understood it all, and chuckled and smiled and looked happy, for all
the world as if it were something better than a mere Indian baby. Poor
little Lamanite! In a year or two it will be strutting about the camp
with its mimic bow and arrows, striking its mother, and sneering at her
as "a squaw," and ten years later (if the end of the race has not then
arrived) may be riding with his tribe on some foul errand of murder,
while his mother carries the lodge-poles and the cooking-pots on foot
behind the young brave's horse. Imagine a life in which begging is the
chief dissipation, and horse-stealing the only industry!

But I can feel a sympathy for the red man. It may be true that neither
gunpowder nor the Gospel can reform him, that his code of morality is
radically incurable, that he is, in fact, "the red-bellied varmint"
that the Western man believes him to be. Yet all the same, remembering
the miracles that British government has worked with the Gonds and
other seemingly hopeless tribes of India, I entertain a lurking
suspicion that under other and more kindly circumstances the Red Indian
might have been to-day a better thing than he is.

At any rate, a people cannot be altogether worthless that in the
deepest depths of their degradation still maintain a lofty wild-beast
scorn of white men, and think them something lower than themselves.
And is not pride the noblest and the easiest of all fulcrums for a
government to work on?

Is it quite certain, for instance, that, given arms, and drilled as
soldiers, detachments of the tribes, as auxiliaries of the regulars,
might not do good service at the different military posts, in routine
duty, of course, and that the prestige of such employment would not
appeal to the military spirit of the tribes at large? What is there
at Fort Halleck that Indians could not do as well as white men? It is
a notorious fact, and as old as American history, that the red man
holds sacred everything that his tribe is guarding. Why should not this
chivalry, common to every savage race on earth, and largely utilized
by other governments in Asia and in Africa, be turned to account
in America too, and Indians be entrusted with the peace of Indian
frontiers?

I know well enough that many will think my suggestion sentimental and
absurd, but fortunately it is just the class who think in that way that
have no real importance in this or in any other country. They are the
men who think the "critturs" ought to be "used up," and who, when they
are in the West, "would as soon shoot an Injun as a coyote." These men
form a class of which America, when she is three generations older,
will have little need for, and who, in a more settled community, will
find that they must either conform to civilization or else "git."
There are a great number of these coarse, thick-skinned, ignorant men
floating about on the surface of Western America: for Western America
still stands in need of men who will do the reckless preliminary work
of settlement, and shoot each other off over a whisky bottle when that
work is done. Now, these men, and those of a feebler kind who take
their opinions from them, believe and preach that annihilation of the
Indian is the only possible cure for the Indian evil. I have heard
them say it in public a score of times that "the Indian should be
wiped clean out." But a larger and more generous class is growing up
very fast in the West, who are beginning to see that the red men are
really a charge upon them: and that as a great nation they must take
upon themselves the responsibilities of empire, and protect the weaker
communities whom a rapidly advancing civilization is isolating in their
midst.

But it is a pity that those in authority cannot see their way to
giving practical effect to such sentiments, and devise some method for
utilizing the Indian. For myself, seeing what has been done in Asia
and in Africa with equally difficult tribes, I should be inclined to
predict success for an experiment in military service, if the routine
duties of barracks and outpost duty, in unnecessary places, can be
called "military service."

For one thing, drilled and well-armed Indians would very soon put a
stop to cow-boy disturbances in Arizona, or anywhere else. Or, again,
if Indians had been on his track, James, the terror of Missouri, would
certainly not have flourished so long as he did.

But by this time we have got far past Elko, and the train is carrying
us through an undulating desert of rabbit-bush and greasewood, with
dull, barren hills on either hand, and then we reach Carlin, another
dreadful-looking hamlet of the Corinne type, and, alas! Gentile also,
without a tree or a road, and nearly every shanty in it a saloon.

More Indians are on the platform. They are allowed, it appears, under
the Company's contract with the government, to ride free of charge
upon the trains, and so the poor creatures spend their summer days,
when they are not away hunting or stealing, in travelling backwards
and forwards from one station to the next, and home again. This does
not strike the civilized imagination as a very exhilarating pastime,
nor one to be contemplated with much enthusiasm of enjoyment. Yet the
Indians, in their own grave way, enjoy it prodigiously.

Curiously enough, they cannot be persuaded to ride anywhere, except on
the platforms between the baggage-cars. But here they cluster as thick
as swarming bees, the in all the fantastic combination of vermilion,
"bucks" tag-rag and nudity, the squaws dragging about ponderous bison
robes and sheep-skins, and laden with papooses, the children, grotesque
little imitations of their parents, with their playthings in their
hands.

For the "papoose" is a human child after all, and the little Shoshonee
girls nurse their dolls just as little girls in New York do, only, of
course, the Red Indian's child carries on her back an imitation papoose
in an imitation pannier, instead of wheeling an imitation American
baby in an imitation American "baby-carriage." I watched one of these
brown fragments of the great sex that gives the world its wives and its
mothers, its sweethearts and its sisters, and it was quite a revelation
to me to hear the wee thing crooning to her wooden baby, and hushing
it to sleep, and making believe to be anxious as to its health and
comforts. Yes, and my mind went back on a sudden to the nursery, on
the other side of the Atlantic, thousands of miles away, where another
little girl sits crooning over her doll of rags and wax, and on her
face I saw just the same expression of troubled concern as clouded the
little Shoshonee's brow, and the same affectation of motherly care.

So it takes something more than mere geographical distance to alter
human nature.



CHAPTER XXII.

FROM NEVADA INTO CALIFORNIA.

    Of Bugbears--Suggestions as to sleeping-cars--A Bannack chief,
    his hat and his retinue--The oasis of Humboldt--Past Carson
    Sink--A reminiscence of wolves--"Hard places"--First glimpses of
    California--A corn miracle--Bunch-grass and Bison--From Sacramento
    to Benicia.

IS a bugbear most bug or bear? I never met one yet fairly face to face,
for the bugbear is an evasive insect. Nor, if I did meet one, can I
say whether I should prefer to find it mainly bug or mainly bear. The
latter is of various sorts. Thus, one, the little black bear of the
Indian hills, is about as formidable as a portmanteau of the same size.
Another, the grizzly of the Rockies, is a very unamiable person. His
temper is as short as his tail; and he has very little more sense of
right and wrong than a Land-leaguer. But he is not so mean as the bug.
You never hear of grizzly bears getting into the woodwork of bedsteads
and creeping out in the middle of the night to sneak up the inside of
your night-shirt. He does not go and cuddle himself up flat in a crease
of the pillow-case, and then slip out edgeways as soon as it is dark,
and bite you in the nape of the neck. It is not on record that a bear
ever got inside a nightcap and waited till the gas was turned out, to
come forth and feed like grief on the damask cheek of beauty. No, these
are not the habits of bears, they are more manly than bugs. If you
want to catch a bear between your finger and thumb, and hold it over
a lighted match on the point of a pin, it will stand still to let you
try. Or if you want to have a good fair slap at a bear with a slipper,
it won't go flattening itself out in the crevices of furniture, in
order to dodge the blow, but will stand up square in the road, in broad
daylight, and let you do it. So, on the whole, I cannot quite make
up my mind whether bugs or bears are the worst things to have about
a house. You see you could shoot at the bear out of the window; but
it would be absurd to fire off rifles at bugs between the blankets.
Besides, bears don't keep you awake all night by leaving you in doubt
as to whether they are creeping about the bed or not, or spoil your
night's rest by making you sit up and grope about under the bed-clothes
and try to see things in the dark. Altogether, then, there is a good
deal to be said on the side of the bear.

I am led to these remarks by remembering that at Carlin, in Nevada, I
found two bugs in my "berth" in the sleeping-car. The porter thought I
must have "brought them with me." Perhaps I did, but, as I told him,
I didn't remember doing so, and with his permission would not take
them any further. Or perhaps the Shoshonees brought them. All Indians,
whether red or brown, are indifferent to these insects, and carry them
about with them in familiar abundance.

And this reminds me to say a little about sleeping-cars in general.
During my travels in America I have used three kinds, the Pullman
Palace, the Silver Palace, and the Baltimore and Ohio, and except
in "high tone," and finish of ornament, where the Pullman certainly
excels the rest, there is very little to choose between them. All are
extremely comfortable as sleeping-cars. In the Silver Palace, however,
there is a custom prevalent of not pulling down the upper berth when it
is unoccupied, and this improvement on the Pullman plan is certainly
very great. The two shelves, one at each end of the berth, are ample
for one's clothes, while the sense of relief and better ventilation
from not having the bottom of another bedstead suspended eighteen
inches or so above your face is decidedly conducive to better rest.
The general adoption of this practice, wherever possible, would, I am
sure, be popular among passengers. As day-cars, the "sleepers" have
one or two defects in common, which might very easily be remedied. For
one thing, every seat should have a removable headrest belonging to
it. As it is, the weary during the day become very weary indeed, and
the attempts of passengers to rest their heads by curling themselves
up on the seats, or lying crosswise in the "section," are as pathetic
as they are often absurd, and give a Palace car the appearance, on
a hot afternoon, of a ward in some Hospital for Spinal Complaints.
Another point that should be altered is the hour for closing the
smoking-room. When not required for berths for passengers (for the
company's employees ought not to be considered when the convenience of
the company's customers is in question) there is no reason whatever
for closing the smoking-room at ten. As a rule it is not closed;
but sometimes it is; and it should not be placed in the power of
a surly conductor--and there are too many ill-mannered conductors
on the railways--to annoy passengers by applying such a senseless
regulation. A third point is the apple-and-newspaper-boy nuisance.
This wretched creature, if of an enterprising kind, pesters you to
purchase things which you have no intention of purchasing, and if you
express any annoyance at his importunity, he is insolent. But apart
from his insolence, he is an unmitigated nuisance. What should be done
is this: a printed slip, such as the boy himself carries and showing
what he sells, should be put on to the seats by the porter, and when
any passenger wants an orange or a book, he could send for the vendor.
But the vendor should be absolutely forbidden to parade his wares in
the sleeping-cars, unless sent for. Anywhere else, except on a train,
he would be handed over to the police for his importunities; but on
the train he considers himself justified in badgering the public,
and impertinently resents being ordered away. These are three small
matters, no doubt, but changes in the direction I have suggested would
nevertheless materially increase the comfort of passengers.

And now let me see. When I fell into these digressions I had just
said good-bye to the Mormons and Mormonland, and had got as far into
Nevada as Carlin. From there a dismal interval of wilderness brings the
traveller to Palisade, a group of wooden saloons haunted by numbers of
yellow Chinese. In the few minutes that the train stopped here, I saw a
curious sight.

A number of our Shoshonee passengers--the "deadheads" on the platform
between the baggage-cars--had got off, and one, of them was the squaw
that had the papoose. As she sat down and unslung her infant from
her back, a group gathered round her--one Englishman, one negro,
three mulattoes, and a Chinaman. And they were all laughing at the
Indian. Not one of them all, not even the negro, but thought himself
entitled to make fun of her and her baby! The white man looks down
on the mulatto, and the mulatto on the negro, and the negro and the
Chinaman reciprocate a mutual disdain; yet here they were, all four
together, on a common platform, loftily ridiculing the Shoshonee! It
was a delightful spectacle for the cynic. But I am no cynic, and yet I
laughed heartily at them all--at them all except the Shoshonee.

I cannot, for the life of me, help venerating these representatives of
aprodigious antiquity, these relics of a civilization that dates back
before our Flood.

Then we reach the Humboldt River, a broad and full-watered stream,
lazily winding along among ample meadows. But not a trace of
cultivation anywhere. And then on to the desert again with the
surface of the alkali land curling up into flakes, and the lank grey
greasewood sparsely scattered about it. The desolation is as utter as
in Beluchistan or the Land of Goshen, and instead of Murrees there are
plenty of Shoshonees to make the desolation perilous to travellers by
waggon. At Battle Creek station they are mustered in quite a crowd,
listless men with faces like masks and women burnished and painted and
wooden as the figure-heads of English barges. I do not think that in
all my travels, in Asia or in Africa, or in the islands of eastern or
southern seas, I have ever met a race with such a baffling physiognomy.
You can no more tell from his face what an Indian is thinking of than
you can from a monkey's. Their eyes brighten and then glaze over again
without a word being spoken or a muscle of the face moved, and they
avert their glance as soon as you look at them. If you look into an
Indian's eyes, they seem to deaden, and all expression dies out of
them; but the moment you begin to turn your head away, at you. They are
hieroglyphics altogether, and there is something "uncanny" about them.

At Battle Creek we note that (with irrigation) trees will grow, but
in a few minutes we are out again on the wretched desert, the eternal
greasewood being the only apology for vegetation, and little prairie
owls the only representatives of wild life. And so to Winnemucca,
where, being watered, a few trees are growing; but the desolation
is nevertheless so complete that I could not help thinking of the
difference a little Mormon industry would make! A company of Bannack
Indians were waiting here for the train, and such a wonderful
collection as they were! One of them was the chief who not long ago
gave the Federal troops a good deal of trouble, and his retinue was
the most delightful medley of curiosities--a long thin man with the
figure of a lamppost, a short fat one with the expression of a pancake,
a half-breed with a beard, and a boy with a squint. The chief, with
a face about an acre in width, wore a stove-pipe hat with the crown
knocked out and the opening stuffed full of feathers, but the rest
of his wonderful costume, all flapping about him in ends and fringes
of all colours and very dirty, is indescribable. His suite were in
a more sober garb, but all were grotesque, their headgear being
especially novel, and showing the utmost scorn of the hatter's original
intentions. Some wore their hats upside down and strapped round the
chin with a ribbon; others inside out, with a fringe of their own added
on behind--but it was enough to make any hatter mad to look at them.

They travelled with us across the next interval of howling wilderness,
and got out to promenade at Humboldt, where we got out to dine--and, as
it proved, to dine well.

Humboldt is an exquisite oasis in the hideous Nevada waste. A fountain
plays before the hotel door, and on either side are planted groves
of trees, poplar and locust and willow, with the turf growing green
beneath them, and roses scattered about.

No wonder that all the birds and butterflies of the neighbourhood
collect at such a beautiful spot, or that travellers go away grateful,
not only for the material benefits of a good meal, but the pleasures
of green trees and running water and the song of birds. An orchard,
with lucerne strong and thick beneath them, promises a continuance of
cultivation, but on a sudden it stops, and we find ourselves out again
on the alkali plain, as barren and blistered as the banks of the Suez
Canal. A tedious hour or two brings us to the river again; but man
here is not agricultural, so the desert continues in spite of abundant
water. And so to Lovelocks, where girls board the train as if they were
brigands, urging us to buy "sweet fresh milk--five cents a glass."
Indians, as usual, are lounging about on the platform, and some more of
them get on to the train, and away we go again into the same Sahara as
before. Humboldt Lake, the "sink" where the river disappears from the
surface of the earth, and a distant glimpse of Carson's "Sink," hardly
relieve the desperate monotony, for they are hideous levels of water
without a vestige of vegetation, and close upon them comes as honest a
tract of desert as even Africa can show, and with no more "features"
on it than a plate of cold porridge has. A wolf goes limping off in a
three-legged kind of way, as much as to say that, having to live in
such a place, it didn't much care whether we caught it or not; and what
a contrast to the pair of wolves I remember meeting one morning in
Afghanistan!

I was riding a camel and looking away to my right across the plain. I
saw coming towards me, over the brushwood, in a series of magnificent
leaps, a couple of immense wolves. I knew that wolves grew sometimes to
a great size, but I had no idea that, even with their winter fur on,
they could be so large as these were.

And there was a majesty about their advance that fascinated me, for
every bound, though it carried them twelve or fifteen feet, was so
free and light that they seemed to move by machinery rather than by
prodigious strength of muscle. But it suddenly occurred to me that they
were crossing my path, and I saw, moreover, that our relative speeds,
if maintained, might probably bring us into actual collision at the
point of intersection. But it was not for me to yield the road, and the
wolves thought it was not for them. And so we approached, the wolves
keeping exact time and leaping together, as if trained to do it, and
then, without swerving a hair's-breadth from their original course they
bounded across the path only a few feet behind my camel. It was superb
courage on their part, and as an episode of wild-beast life, one of the
most picturesque and dramatic I ever witnessed.

The next station we halted at was Wadsworth, a "hard place," so
men say, where revolvers are in frequent use and Lynch is judge.
Here the broad-faced Bannack chief got down, and, followed by his
tag-rag retinue, disappeared into the cluster of wigwams which we
saw pitched behind the station. I noticed a man standing here with a
splendid cactus in his hand, covered with large magenta blossoms, and
this reminded me to note the conspicuous change in the botany that
about here takes place. The flowers that had borne us company all
through Utah and now and then brightened the roadside in Nevada had
disappeared, and were replaced by others of species nearly all new
to me. I saw here for the first time a golden-flowered cactus and a
tall lavender-coloured spiraea of singular beauty. A little beyond
Wadsworth the change becomes even more marked, for striking the Truckee
river, we exchange desolation for pretty landscape, and the desert for
green bottom lands. The alteration was a welcome one, and some of the
glimpses, even if we had not passed through such a melancholy region,
would have claimed our admiration on their own merits. The full-fed
river poured along a rapid stream, through low-lying meadow-lands
fringed with tall cotton-wood, the valley sometimes narrowing so much
that the river took up all the room, and then widening out so as to
admit of large expanses of grass and occasional fields of corn. And so
to Greeno, where we supped heartily off "Truckee trout," one of the
best fish that ever wagged a fin. As we got back into the cars it was
getting dark, for with the usual luck of travel the Central Pacific
has to run its trains so as to give passengers ugly Nevada by day and
beautiful California by night.

Awaking next morning was a wonderful surprise. We had gone to sleep in
Nevada in early summer, and we awoke in California late in autumn! In
Utah, two days ago, the crops had only just begun to flush the ground
with green. Here, to-day, the corn-fields were the sun-dried stubble of
crops that had been cut weeks ago!

And the first glimpses of it were fortunate ones, for when I awoke
it was in a fine park-like, undulating country, studded with clumps
of oak-trees, but one continuous cornfield. Great mounds of straw
and stacks of corn dotted the landscape as far as the eye could see,
and already the fields were alive with carts and men all busy with
the splendid harvest. After a while came vast expanses of meadow,
prettily timbered, in which great flocks of sheep and herds of cattle
were grazing, ranches such as I had never seen before. And then we
passed some houses, broad-eaved and verandahed, with capacious barns
standing in echelon behind, and all the signs of an ample prosperity,
deep shaded in walnut-trees laden with nuts, overrun by vines already
heavy with clusters, and brightened by clumps of oleanders ruddy with
blossom. And then came the corn-fields again, an unbroken expanse of
stubble, yellow as the sea-sand, and seemingly as interminable. What a
country! It is a kingdom in itself.

And its rivers! The American River soon came in sight, rolling its
stately flood along between brakes of willow and elder, and aspen, and
then the Sacramento, a noble stream. And the two conspire and join
together to take liberties with the solid earth, swamp it into bulrush
beds by the league together, and create such jungles as almost rival
the great Himalaya Terai. And so to Sacramento.

Sacramento was en fete, for it was the race week. So bunting was
flapping from every conspicuous point, and everything and everybody
wore a whole holiday, morning-cocktail, go-as-you-please sort of look.
This fact may account for the very ill-mannered conductor who boarded
us here.

I am sitting in the smoking-car. Enter conductor with his mouth too
full of tobacco to be able to speak. He points at me with his thumb. I
take no notice of his thumb. He spits in the spittoon at my feet and
jerks his thumb towards me again. I disregard his thumb. "Ticket!" he
growls. I give him my ticket. He punches it and thrusts it back to me
so carelessly and suddenly that it falls on the floor. He takes no
notice, but passes on into the car. I take out my pocket-book and make
a note;--

"Such a man as this goes some way towards discrediting the
administration of a whole line. It seems a pity therefore to retain his
services."

However, of Sacramento, I was very sorry not to be able to stay there,
for next to the Los Angeles country I had been told that it was one of
the finest "locations" in all California, and I can readily believe it,
for the botany of the place is sub-tropical, and snow and sunstroke
are equally unknown. Fruits of all kinds grow there in delightful
abundance, and I cherish it therefore as a personal grudge against
Sacramento that there was not even a blackberry procurable at breakfast.

Passing from Sacramento, and remarking as we go, the patronage which
that vegetable impostor, the eucalyptus globulus (or "blue-gum" of
Australia) has secured, both as an ornamental--save the mark!--and
a shade-tree, two purposes for which by itself the eucalyptus is
specially unfitted, we find ourselves once more in a world given up to
harvesting. A monotonous panorama of stubble and standing crops, with
clumps of pretty oak timber studding the undulating land, leads us to
the diversified approaches to San Francisco.

It is old travellers' ground, but replete with the interest which
attaches to variety of scenery, continual indications of vast wealth,
and a rapidly growing prosperity. But one word, before we reach the
town, for that wonderful natural crop--the "wild oats," which clothe
every vacant acre of the country on this Pacific watershed with
harvests as close and as regular as if the land had been tilled, and
the ground sown, by human agency. This surprising plant is said to have
been brought to California by the Spaniards, and to have run wild from
the original fields. But whatever its origin, it is now growing in such
vast prairies that whole tribes of Indians used to look to it as the
staple of their food. But better crops are fast displacing it, and as
for the Indian, California no longer belongs to him or his bison-herds.
Further east, that is to say, from the Platte Valley to the Sierra
Nevada, the "bunch grass" was the great natural provision for the wild
herds of the wild man, and it still ranks as one of the most valuable
features of otherwise barren regions in Colorado, Utah, and Nevada.
To the student of Nature, however, it is far more interesting as one
of the most beautiful examples of her kindly foresight, for the bunch
grass grows where nothing else can find nourishment, and just when
all other grasses are useless as fodder, it throws out young juicy
shoots, thrives under the snow, and then in May, when other grasses are
abundant, it dies! Somebodv has said that without the mule and the pig
America would never have been colonized. That may be as it may be. But
the real pioneer of the West was the bison, for the first emigrants
followed exactly in the footsteps of the retiring herds, and these in
their turn grazed their way towards the Pacific in the line of the
bunch grass.

Mount Diavolo is the first "feature" that arouses the traveller's
inquisitiveness, and then the Martines Straits with their yellow
waters spread out at the feet of rolling, yellow hills, and then great
mud flats on which big vessels lie waiting for the tide to come and
float them on, and then a bay which, with its girdle of hills and its
broad margin, reminds me of Durban in Natal. So to Benicia, the place
of "the Boy," with the blacksmith's forge where Heenan used to work
still standing near the water's edge, and where the hammer that the
giant used to use is still preserved "in memoriam," and then on to the
ferry-boat (train and all!) and across a bay of brown water and brown
mud and brown hills--dismally remindful of Weston-super-Mare--and on
to dry land again, past Berkley, with its college among the trees,
Oakland, and other suburban resorts of the San Franciscan, to the
fine new three-storeyed Station at the pier. Once more on to the
ferry-boat, but this time leaving our train behind us and across
another bay, and so into San Francisco. Outside the station stands a
crowd of chariot-like omnibuses, as gorgeously coloured, some of them,
as the equipages of a circus, and empanelled with gaudy pictures. In
one of them we find our proper seats, and are soon bumping over the
cobble-stones into "the most wonderful city, sir, of America."



CHAPTER XXIII.

    San Franciscans, their fruits and their falsehoods--Their neglect
    of opportunities--A plague of flies--The pig-tail problem--Chinamen
    less black than they are painted--The seal rocks--The loss of the
    Eurydice--A jeweller's fairyland--The mystery of gems.

SOMEBODY has poked fun at San Francisco, by calling it the "Venice of
the West," and then qualifying the compliment by explaining that the
only resemblance between the two cities is in the volume and variety of
the disagreeable smells that prevail in them. But the San Franciscans
take no notice of this explanation. They accept the comparison in its
broadest sense, and positively expect you to see a resemblance between
their very wonderful, but very new town, and Venice! Indeed, there is
no limit to the San Franciscan's expectations from a stranger.

Now, I was sitting in the hotel one day and overheard a couple of San
Franciscans bragging in an off-hand way to a poor wretch who had been
brought up, I should guess, in New Mexico, and calmly assuring him that
there was no place "in the world" of greater beauty than San Francisco,
or of more delicious fruit. I pretended to fall into the same easy
credulity myself, and drew them on to making such monstrous assertions
as that San Francisco was a revelation of beauty to all travellers, and
the perfection of its fruit a never-ceasing delight to them! I then
ventured deferentially to inquire what standard of comparison they had
for their self-laudation, what other countries they had visited, and
what fruits they considered California produced in such perfection.
Now, it turned out that these three impostors had never been out of
America: in fact, that, except for short visits on business to the
Eastern States, they had never been out of California and Nevada! I
then assured them that, for myself, I had seen, in America alone, many
places far more beautiful, while "in the world" I knew of a hundred
with which San Francisco should not venture to compare itself. As for
its fruits, there was not in its market, nor in its best shops, a
single thing that deserved to be called first-class. From the watery
cherries to the woolly apricots, every fruit was as flavourless as it
dared to be, while, as a whole, they were so second-rate that they
could not have found a sale in the best shops of either Paris or
London. The finest fruit, to my mind, was a small but well-flavoured
mango, imported from Mexico. Its flavour was almost equal to that of
the langra of the Benares district, or the green mango of Burmah; and
if the Maldah was grafted on to this Mexican stock, the result would
probably be a fruit that would be as highly prized in New York and in
England, as it is all over Asia. But very few people in San Francisco
ever buy mangoes. "No, sir," I said at last to the barbarian who had
been imposed upon; "don't you believe any one who tells you that San
Francisco is the most lovely spot on earth, or that its fruits are
extraordinary in flavour. San Francisco is a wonderful city; it is the
Wonder of the West. But you must not believe all that San Franciscans
tell you about it."

It is a great pity that San Franciscans should have this weakness. They
have plenty to be proud of, for their city is a marvel. But it has as
yet all the disadvantages of newness. Its population, moreover, is
as disagreeably unsettled as in the towns of the Levant. All the mud
and dirt are still in suspension. I know very well, of course, that
improvement is making immense and rapid strides, but to the visitor the
act of transition is, of course, invisible, and he only sees the place
at a period of apparent repose between the last point of advance and
the next. He can imagine anything he pleases--and it is difficult to
imagine the full splendour of the future of the Californian capital.
But this is not what he actually sees. For myself, then, I found San
Francisco as so many other travellers have described it, disorderly,
breathless with haste, unkempt. Here and there, where trees have
been planted, and there is the grace of flowers and creeping plants,
the houses look as if rational people might really live in them. But
for the vast majority of the buildings, they seem merely places to
lodge in, dak-bungalows or rest-houses, perches for passing swallows,
anything you like--except houses to pass one's life in. They are not
merely wooden, but they are sham too, with their imposing "fronts"
nailed on to the roofs to make them look finer, just as vulgar women
paste curly "bangs" on to the fronts of their heads. There is also
an inexcusable dearth of ornament. I say inexcusable, because San
Francisco might be a perfect paradise of flowers and trees. Even the
"weeds" growing on the sand dunes outside the city are flowers that are
prized in European gardens. But as it is, Francois Jeannot,--"French
gardener, with general enterprise of gardens," as his signboard
states,--has evidently very little to do. There is little "enterprise
of gardens." Yet what exquisite flowers there are! The crimson salvia
grows in strong hedges, and plots are fenced in with geraniums.
The fuchsias are sturdy shrubs in which birds might build their
nests, and the roses and jessamines and purple clematis of strange,
large-blossomed kinds, form natural arbours of enchanting beauty.
Lobelias spread out into large cushions of a royal blue, and the canna,
wherever sown, sends up shafts of vivid scarlet, orange, and yellow.

If I only knew the names of other plants I could fill a page with
descriptions of the wonderful luxuriance of San Franciscan flowers.
But all I could say would only emphasize the more clearly the apparent
neglect by the San Franciscans of the floral opportunities they possess.

It is curious how enthusiastic California has been in its reception
of the eucalyptus globulus, the blue-gum tree of Australia. And I
am afraid there has been some job put upon the San Franciscans in
this matter. Has anybody, with a little speculation in blue-gums on
hand, been telling them that the eucalyptus was a wonderful drainer
of marshes and conqueror of fevers? If so, it is a pity they had not
heard that that hoax was quite played out in Europe, and the eucalyptus
shown to be an impostor. Or were they told of its stately proportions,
its rapid growth, its beautiful foliage, and its splendid shade? If
so, that hoax will soon expose itself. Given a site where no wind
blows, the eucalyptus will grow straight, but offered the smallest
provocation it flops off to one side or the other, while its foliage
is liable probably beyond that of all other trees to discoloration
and raggedness. In Natal it has proved itself very useful as fencing,
for neither wood nor stone being procurable, slips and shreds of
eucalyptus have soon grown up into permanent hedges. But no one thinks
of valuing it anywhere, except in Australia, either for its timber, its
appearance, or its medicinal virtues.

In many ways the Queen of the Pacific was a surprise; I had expected
to find it "semi-tropical." It is nothing of the kind. Women were
wearing furs every afternoon (in June) because of the chill wind that
springs up about three o'clock, and men walked about with great-coats
over their arms ready for use. The architecture of the city is not
so "semi-tropical" as that of suburban New York, while vegetation,
instead of being rampant, is conspicuously absent. Three women out
of every four wore very thick veils, but why they were so thick I
could not discover. In hot countries they do not wear them, nor in
"semi-tropical." Perhaps they were vestiges of some recent visitation
of dust, which appears to be sometimes as prodigious here as it is in
Pietermaritzburg. But they might, very properly, have been an armour
against the flies which swarmed in some parts of the town in hideous
multitudes. I went into a large restaurant, the "Palace" something it
was called, with the intention of eating, but I left without doing so,
a palled by the plague of flies. I found Beelzebub very powerful in
Washington, and at some of "the eating places" in the South his hosts
were intolerable; but San Francisco has streets as completely given
over to the fly-fiend as an Alexandrian bazaar.

Before I went to San Francisco, I had an idea that a "Chinese question"
was agitating the State of California, that every white man was excited
about the expulsion of the heathen, that it was the topic of the day,
and that passion ran high between the rival populations. I very soon
found that I had been mistaken, and that there is really no "Chinese
question" at all in California. At least, the one question now is,
how to evade the late bill stopping Chinese immigration; and it was
gleefully pointed out to me that though the importation of Celestials
by sea was prohibited, there was no provision to prevent them being
brought into the State by land; and that the numbers of the arrivals
would not probably diminish in the least!

I had intended to "study" the Chinese question. But there is not much
study to be done over a ghost. Besides, every Californian manufacturer
is agreed on the main points, that Chinese labour is absolutely
necessary, that there is not enough of it yet in the State, that more
still must be obtained. And where a "problem" is granted on all hands,
it is hardly worth while affecting to search for profound social,
political, or economical complication in it. There is not much more
mystery about it than about the nose on a man's face.

Of course those who organized the clamour have what they call
"arguments," but they are hardly such as can command respect. In the
first place they allege two apprehensions as to the future: 1. That
the Chinese, if unrestricted, will swamp the Americans in the State;
and 2. That they will demoralize those Americans. Now the first is, I
take it, absurd, and if it is not, then California ought to be ashamed
of itself. And as for the second, who can have any sympathy with a
State that is unable to enforce its police regulations, or with a
community in which parents say they cannot protect the purity of their
households? If the Chinaman, as a citizen, disregards sanitary bye-laws
why is he not punished, as he would be everywhere else: and if as a
domestic servant he misbehaves, why is he not dispensed with, as he
would be everywhere else?

Besides these two apprehensions as to the future, they have three
objections as to the present. The first is, that the Chinese send their
earnings out of the country; the second, that they spend nothing in San
Francisco; the third, that they underwork white men. Now the first is
foolish, the second and the third, I believe, untrue. As to the Chinese
carrying money out of the country--why should they not do so? Will
any one say seriously that America, a bullion-producing country, is
injured by the Chinese taking their money earnings out of the States,
in exchange for that which America cannot produce, namely, labour? Is
political economy to go mad simply to suit the sentiment of extra-white
labour in California?

As to the Chinese spending nothing in this country, this is hardly
borne out by facts, and, in the mouths Of San Franciscans, specially
unfortunate. For they have not only raised their prices upon the
Chinese, but have actually forbidden them to spend their money in
those directions in which they wished to do so. As it is, however,
they spend, in exorbitant rents, taxes, customs-dues, and in direct
expenditure, a perfectly sufficient share of their earnings, and
if permitted to do so, would spend a great deal more. A ludicrous
superstition, that the Chinese are economical, underlies many of the
misstatements put forward as "arguments" against them. Yet they are
not economical. On the contrary, the Chinese and the Japanese are
exceptional among Eastern races for their natural extravagance.

It is further alleged that they underwork white men. This statement
will hardly bear testing; for the wages of a Chinese workman, in the
cigar trade, for instance, are not lower than those of a white man,
say, in Philadelphia. They do not, therefore, "underwork" the white
man; but they do undoubtedly underwork the white Californian. For the
white Californian will not work at Eastern rates. On the contrary, he
wishes to know whether you take him for "a -- fool" to think that he,
in California, is going to accept the same wages that he could have
stopped in New York for! Yet why should he not do so? It will hardly
be urged that the Californian Irishman is a superior individual to the
Eastern American, or that the average San Franciscan workman is any
better than the men of his own class on the Atlantic coast? Yet the
Californian claims higher wages, and abuses the Chinese for working at
rates which white men are elsewhere glad to accept. He says, too, that
living is dearer. Facts disprove this. As a matter of fact, living is
cheaper in San Francisco than in either Chicago or New York.

How did I spend my time in San Francisco? Well, friends were very kind
to me, and I saw everything that a visitor "ought to see." But after my
usual fashion I wandered about the streets a good deal alone, and rode
up and down in the street-cars, and I had half a mind at first to be
disappointed with the city of which r had heard so much. But later in
the evening, when the gas was alight and the pavement had its regular
habitues, and the pawnbrokers' and bankrupts'-stock stores were all lit
up, I saw what a wild, strange city it was. Indeed, I know of no place
in the world more full of interesting incidents and stirring types than
this noisy, money-spending San Francisco.

One night, of course, I spent several hours in the Chinese quarter, and
I cannot tell why, but I took a great fancy to the Celestial, as he is
to be seen in San Francisco. Politically, nationally, and commercially,
I hate Pekin and all its works. But individually I find the Chinaman,
all the world over, a quiet-mannered, cleanly-living, hard-working
servant. And in all parts of the world, except California, my estimate
of Johnnie is the universal one. In California, however, so the
extra-white people say, he is a dangerous, dirty, demoralizing heathen.
And there is no doubt of it that, in the Chinese quarter of the city,
he is crowded into a space that would be perilous to the health of
men accustomed to space and ventilation, but I was told by a Chinaman
that he and his people had been prevented by the city authorities from
expanding into more commodious lodgings. As for cleanliness, I have
travelled too much to forget that this virtue is largely a question
of geography, and that, especially in matters of food, the habits of
Europeans are considered by half the world so foul as to bring them
within the contempt of a hemisphere. As regards personal cleanliness,
the Chinese are rather scrupulous.

But I wonder San Francisco does not build a Chinatown, somewhere in the
breezy suburbs, and lay a tramway to it for the use of the Chinamen,
and then insist upon its sanitary regulations being properly observed.
San Francisco would be rather surprised at the result. For the
settlements of the Chinese are very neat and cleanly in appearance, and
the people are very fond of curious gardening and house-ornamentation.
The Chinese themselves would be only too glad to get out of the centre
of San Francisco and the quarters into which they are at present
compelled to crowd, while their new habitations would very soon be
one of the most attractive sights of all the city. As it is, it is
picturesque, but it is of necessity dirty--after the fashion of Asiatic
dirtiness. Smells that seem intolerable assail the visitor perpetually,
but after all they were better than the smell from an eating-house
in Kearney Street which we passed soon after, and where creatures of
Jewish and Christian persuasions were having fish fried. I am not
wishing to apologize for the Chinese. I hate China with a generous
Christian vindictiveness, and think it a great pity that dismemberment
has not been forced upon that empire long ago as a punishment for her
massacres of Catholics, and her treason generally against the commerce
and polity of Europe. But I cannot forget that California owes much to
the Chinese.

Next to the Chinese, I found the sea-lions the most interesting feature
of San Francisco. To reach them, however (if you do not wish to indulge
the aboriginal hackman with an opportunity for extortion), you have to
undergo a long drive in a series of omnibuses and cars, but the journey
through the sand-waste outskirts of the city is thoroughly instructive,
for the intervals of desert remind you of the original condition of
the country on which much of San Francisco has been built, while the
intervals of charming villa residences in oases of gardens, show what
capital can do, even with only sea-sand to work upon. We call Ismailia
a wonder--but what is Ismailia in comparison with San Francisco! After
a while solid sand dunes supervene, beautiful, however, in places
with masses of yellow lupins, purple rocket, and fine yellow-flowered
thistles, and then the broad sea comes into sight, and so to the Cliff
House.

Just below the House, one of the most popular resorts of San Francisco,
the "Seal Rocks" stand up out of the water, and it is certainly one of
the most interesting glimpses of wild life that the whole world affords
to see the herds of "sea-lions" clambering and sprawling about their
towers of refuge. For Government has forbidden their being killed,
so the huge creatures drag about their bulky slug-shaped bodies in
confident security. It would not be very difficult I should think for
an amateur to make a sea-lion. There is very little shape about them.
But, nevertheless, it is such a treat as few can have enjoyed twice in
their lives to see these mighty ones of the deep basking on the sunny
rocks, and ponderously sporting in the water.

And looking out to sea, beyond the sea-lions, I saw a spar standing
up out of the water. It was the poor Escambia that had sunk there the
day before, and there, on the beach to the left of the Cliff House,
was the spot where the three survivors of the crew managed to make
good their hold in spite of the pitiless surf, and to clamber up out
of reach of the waves. And all through the night, with the lights of
the Cliff House burning so near them, the men lay there exhausted with
their struggle. It was a strange wreck altogether. When she left port,
every one who saw her careening over said "she must go down;" every
one who passed her said "she must go down;" the pilot left her, saying
"she must go down;" the crew came round the captain, saying "she must
go down." But the skipper held on his way awhile, and at last he too
turned to his mate; "she must go down," he said. Then he tried to head
her to port again, but a wave caught her broadside as she was clumsily
answering the helm; and while the coastguard, who had been watching her
through his glass, turned for a moment to telephone to the city that
"she must go down,"--she did. When he put up the glasses to his eyes
again, there was no Escambia in sight! She had gone down.

And the sight of that lonely spar, signalling so pathetically the
desolate waste of waves the spot of the ship's disaster, brought back
to my mind a Sunday in Ventnor, where the people of the town, looking
out across to sea, stood to watch the beautiful Eurydice go by in her
full pomp of canvas. A bright sun glorified her, and her crew, met for
Divine Service, were returning thanks to Heaven for the prosperous
voyage they had made. And suddenly over Dunnose there rushed up a dark
bank of cloud. A squall, driving a tempest of snow before it, struck
the speeding vessel, and in the fierce whirl of the snowdrift the folk
on shore lost sight of the Eurydice for some minutes. But as swiftly
as it had come, the squall had passed. The sun shone brightly again,
but on a troubled sea. And where was the gallant ship, homeward bound,
and all her gallant company? She had gone down, all sail set, all
hands aboard. And the boats dashed out from the shore to the rescue!
But alas! only two survivors out of the three hundred and fifty souls
that manned the barque ever set foot on shore again! And the news
flashed over England that the Eurydice was "lost." For days and weeks
afterwards there stood up out of the water, half-way between Shanklin
and Luccombe Chine, one lonely spar, like a gravestone, and those who
rowed over the wreck could see, down below them under the clear green
waves, the shimmer of the white sails of the sunken war-boat. She
was lying on her side, the fore and mizzen top-gallant masts gone,
her top-gallant sails hanging, but with her main-mast in its place,
and all the other sails set. The squall had struck her full, and she
rolled over at once, the sea rising at one rush above the waists of the
crew, and her yards lying on the water. Then, righting for an instant,
she made an effort to recover herself. But the weight of water that
had already poured in between decks drove her under. The sea then
leaped with another rush upon her, and in an awful swirl of waves the
beautiful ship, with all her crew, went down. The Channel tide closed
over the huge coffin, and except for the two men saved, and the corpses
which floated ashore, there was nothing to tell of the sudden tragedy.

And then back into the city and amongst its shipping. I have all the
Britisher's attraction towards the haunts of the men that "go down to
the sea in ships." Indeed, walking about among great wharves and docks,
with the shipping of all nations loading and discharging cargo, and men
of all nations hard at work about you, is in itself a liberal education.

But it can nowhere be enjoyed in such perfection as in London. There,
emphatically, is the world's market; and written large upon the
pavement of her gigantic docks is the whole Romance of Trade. A single
shed holds the products of all the Continents; and what a book it would
be that told us of the strange industries of foreign lands! Who cut
that ebony and that iron-wood in the Malayan forests? and how came
these palm-nuts here from the banks of the Niger? Mustard from India,
and coffee-berries from Ceylon lie together to be crushed under one
boot, and here at one step you can tread on the chili-pods of Jamaica
and the pea-nuts of America. That rat that ran by was a thing from
Morocco; this squashed scorpion, perhaps, began life in Cyprus or in
Bermuda. Queer little stowaways of insect life are here in abundance,
the parasites of Egyptian lentils or of Indian corn. The mosquito
natives of Bengal swamps are brought here, it may be, in teakwood
from some drift on the Burman coast. All the world's produce is in
convention together. Here stands a great pyramid of horned skulls, the
owners of which once rampaged on Brazilian pampas, or the prairies of
the Platte River, and hard by them lie piled a multitude of hides that
might have fitted the owners of those skulls, had it not been that
they once clothed the bodies of cattle that grazed out their lives in
Australia. Juxtaposition of packages here means nothing. It does not
argue any previous affinities. This ship happens to be discharging
Norwegian pine, in which the capercailzies have roosted, and for want
of space the logs are being piled on to sacks of ginger from the
West Indies. Next them there happens to-day to be cutch from India;
to-morrow there may be gamboge from Siam, or palm oil from the Gold
Coast. These men here are trundling in great casks of Spanish wine that
have been to the Orient for their health; but an hour ago they were
wheeling away chests of Assam tea, and in another hour may be busy with
logwood from the Honduras forests. One of them is all white on the
shoulders with sacks of American wheat flour, but his hands are stained
all the same with Bengal turmeric, and he is munching as he goes a
cardamum from the Coromandel coast. What a book it would make--this
World's Work!

And then back through this city of prodigious bustle, through fine
streets with masses of solid buildings that stand upon a site which,
a few years ago, was barren sea-sand, and some of it, too, actually
sea-beach swept by the waves!

The frequency of diamonds in the windows is a point certain to catch
the stranger's eye, but his interest somewhat diminishes when he finds
that they are only "California diamonds." They are exquisite stones,
however, and, to my thinking, more beautiful than coloured gems, ruby,
sapphire, or amethyst, that are more costly in price. But the real
diamond can, nevertheless, be seen in perfection in San Francisco.
Go to Andrews' "Diamond Palace," and take a glimpse of a jeweller's
fairyland. The beautiful gems fairly fill the place with light, while
the owner's artistic originality has devised many novel methods of
showing off his favourite gem to best advantage. The roof and walls,
for instance, are frescoed with female figures adorned on neck and arm,
finger, ear, and waist, with triumphs of the lapidary's art.

There is something very fascinating to the fancy in gems, for the one
secret that Nature still jealously guards from man is the composition
of those exquisite crystals which we call "precious stones." We can
imitate, and do imitate, some of them with astonishing exactness,
but after all is done there still remains something lacking in
the artificial stone. Wise men may elaborate a prosaic chemistry,
producing crystals which they declare to be the fac-similes of Nature's
delightful gems; but the world will not accept the ruddy residue of a
crucible full of oxides as rubies, or the shining fragments of calcined
bisulphides as emeralds. No crucible yet constructed can hold a native
sapphire, and all the alchemy of man directed to this point has failed
to extort from carbon the secret of its diamond--the little crystal
that earth with all her chemistry has made so few of, since first
heat and water, Nature's gem-smiths, joined their forces to produce
the glittering stones. They placed under requisition every kingdom
of created things, and in a laboratory in mid-earth set in joint
motion all the powers that move the volcano and the earthquake, that
re-fashion the world's form and substance, that govern all the stately
procession of natural phenomena. Yet with all this Titanic labour, this
monstrous co-operation of forces, Nature formed only here and there
a diamond, and here and there a ruby. Masses of quartz, crystals of
every exquisite tint, amethystine and blue, as beautiful, perhaps, in
delicacy of hue as the gems themselves, were sown among the rocks and
scattered along the sands, but only to tell us how near Nature came to
making her jewels common, and how--just when the one last touch was
needed--she withheld her hand, so that man should confess that the
supreme triumphs of her art were indeed "precious"!



CHAPTER XXIV.

    Gigantic America--Of the treatment of strangers--The
    wild-life world--Railway Companies' food-frauds--California
    Felix--Prairie-dog history--The exasperation of wealth--Blessed
    with good oil--The meek lettuce and judicious onion--Salads and
    Salads--The perils of promiscuous grazing.

I HAD looked forward to my journey from San Francisco to St. Louis
with great anticipations, and, though I had no leisure to "stop off"
on the tour, I was not disappointed. Six continuous days and nights of
railway travelling carried me through such prodigious widths of land,
that the mere fact of traversing so much space had fascinations. And
the variations of scene are very striking--the corn and grape lands of
Southern California, that gradually waste away into a hideous cactus
desert, and then sink into a furnace-valley, several hundred feet below
the level of the sea; the wild pastures of Texas, that seem endless,
until they end in swamped woodlands; the terrific wildernesses of
Arkansas, that gradually soften down into the beautiful fertility of
Missouri. It was a delightful journey, and taught me in one week's
panorama more than a British Museum full of books could have done.

Visitors to America do not often make the journey. They are beguiled
off by way of Santa Fe and Kansas City. I confess that I should myself
have been very glad to have visited Santa Fe, and some day or other I
intend to pitch my tent for a while in San Antonio. But if I had to
give advice to a traveller, I would say:--

"Take the Southern Pacific to El Paso, and the Texan Pacific on to St.
Louis, and you will get such an idea of the spaciousness of America as
no other trip can give you." You will see prodigious tracts of country
that are still in aboriginal savagery and you will travel through whole
nations of hybrid people--Mexicans and mulattoes, graduated commixtures
of Red Indian, Spaniard, and Negro--that some day or another must
assume a very considerable political importance in the Union.

Nothing would do Americans more good than a tour through Upper India.
Nothing could do European visitors to America more good than the
journey from San Francisco to St. Louis by the Southern-and-Texas
route. The Gangetic Valley, the Western Ghats, the Himalayas, are all
experiences that would ameliorate, improve, and impress the American.
The Arizona cactus-plains, the Texan flower-prairies, the Arkansas
swamps, give the traveller from Europe a more truthful estimate of
America, as a whole, by their vastness, their untamed barbarism, their
contrast with the civilized and domesticated States, than years of
travel on the beaten tracks from city to city.

And here just a word or two to those American gentlemen to whom
it falls to amuse or edify the sight-seeing foreigner. Do not be
disappointed if he shows little enthusiasm for your factories, and
mills, and populous streets. Remember that these are just what he is
trying to escape from. The chances are, that he would much rather see a
prairie-dog city, than the Omaha smelting-works; an Indian lodge than
Pittsburg; one wild bison than all the cattle of Chicago; a rattlesnake
at home than all the legislature of New York in Albany assembled. He
prefers canyons to streets, mountain streams to canals; and when he
crosses the river, it is the river more than the bridge that interests
him. Of course it is well for him to stay in your gigantic hotels,
go down into your gigantic silver-mines, travel on your gigantic
river-steamers, and be introduced to your gigantic millionaires. These
are all American, and it is good for him, and seemly, that he should
add them to his personal experiences. So too, he should eat terrapin
and planked shad, clam-chowder, canvas-back ducks, and soft-shelled
crabs. For these are also American. But the odds are he may go mad
and bite thee fatally, if thou wakest him up at un-Christian hours to
go and see a woollen factory, simply because thou art proud of it--or
settest him down to breakfast before perpetual beefsteak, merely
because he is familiar with that food. The intelligent traveller, being
at Rome, wishes to be as much a Roman as possible. He would be as
aboriginal as the aborigines. And it is a mistake to go on thrusting
things upon him solely on the ground that he is already weary of them.
As I write, I remember many hours of bitter anguish which I have
endured--I who am familiar with Swansea, who have stayed in Liverpool,
who live in London--in loitering round smelting works and factories,
and places of business, trying to seem interested, and pretending to
store my memory with statistics. Sometimes it would be almost on my
tongue to say, "And now, sir, having shown off your possessions in
order to gratify your own pride in them, suppose you show me something
for my gratification." I never did, of course, but I groaned in the
spirit, at my precious hours being wasted, and at the hospitality
which so easily forgot itself in ostentatious display. I have perhaps
said more than I meant to have done. But all I mean is this, that when
a sojourner is at your mercy, throw him unreservedly upon his own
resources for such time as you are busy, and deny yourself unreservedly
for his amusement when you are at leisure. But do not spoil all his
day, and half your own, by trying to work your usual business habits
into his holiday, and take advantage of his foreign helplessness to
show him what an important person (when at home) you are yourself. Do
not, for instance, take him after breakfast to your office, and there
settling to your work with your clerks, ask him to "amuse himself"
with the morning papers--for three hours; and then, after a hurried
luncheon at your usual restaurant, take him back to the office for a
few minutes--another hour; and then, having carefully impressed upon
him that you are taking a half-holiday solely upon his account, and in
spite of all the overwhelming business that pours in upon you, do not
take him for a drive in the Mall--in order to show off your new horses
to your own acquaintances; and after calling at a few shops (during
which time your friend stays in the trap and holds the reins), do not,
oh do not, take him back to your house to a solitary dinner "quite
in the English style." No, sir; this is not the way to entertain the
wayfarer in such a land of wonders as this; and you ought not therefore
to feel surprise when your guest, wearied of your mistaken hospitality,
and wearied of your perpetual suggestions of your own self-sacrifice on
his behalf, suddenly determines not to be a burden upon you any longer,
and escapes the same evening to the most distant hotel in the town. Nor
when you read this ought you to feel angry. You did him a great wrong
in wasting a whole day out of his miserable three, and exasperated
him by telling his friends afterwards what a "good time" he had with
you. These few words are his retaliation--not written either in the
vindictive spirit of reprisal, but as advice to you for the future and
in the interests, of strangers who may follow him within your gates.

From San Francisco to Lathrop, back on the route we came by, to
Oakland, and over the brown waters of the arrogant Sacramento--swelling
out as if it would imitate the ocean, and treating the Pacific as if
it were merely "a neighbor,"--and out into thousands and thousands of
acres of corn, stubble, and mown hay-fields, the desolation worked by
the reaper-armies of peace-time with their fragrant plunder lying in
heaps all ready for the carts; and the camp-followers--the squirrels,
and the rats, and the finches--all busy gleaning in the emptied fields,
with owls sitting watchful on the fences, and vigilant buzzards sailing
overhead. What an odd life this is, of the squirrels and the buzzards,
the mice, and the owls! They used to watch each other in these fields,
just in the very same way, ages before the white men came. The
colonization of the Continent means to the squirrels and mice merely
a change in their food, to the hawks and the owls merely a slight
change in the flavour of the squirrels and mice! So, too, when the
Mississippi suddenly swelled up in flood the other day, and overflowed
three States, it lengthened conveniently the usual water-ways of the
frogs, and gave the turtles a more comfortable amplitude of marsh.
Hundreds of negroes narrowly escaped drowning, it is true; but what an
awful destruction there was of smaller animal life! Scores of hamlets
were doubtless destroyed, but what myriads of insect homes were ruined!
It does one good, I think, sometimes to remember the real aborigines
of our earth, the worlds that had their laws before ours, those
conservative antiquities with a civilization that was perfect before
man was created, and which neither the catastrophes of nature nor the
triumphs of science have power to abrogate.

Oak trees dot the rolling hills, and now and again we come to houses
with gardens and groves of eucalyptus, but for hours we travel through
one continuous corn-field, a veritable Prairie Of Wheat, astounding in
extent and in significance. And then we come upon the backwaters of the
San Joacquin, and the flooded levels of meadow, with their beautiful
oak groves, and herds of cattle and horses grazing on the lush grass
that grows between the beds of green tuilla reeds. It is a lovely reach
of country this, and some of the water views are perfectly enchanting.
But why should the company carefully board up its bridges so that
travellers shall not enjoy the scenes up and down the rivers which
they cross? It seems to me a pity to do so, seeing that it is really
quite unnecessary. As it was, we saw just enough of beauty to make us
regret the boards. Then, after the flooded lands, we enter the vast
corn-fields again, and so arrive at Lathrop.

Here we dined, and well, the service also being excellent, for half a
dollar. Could not the Union Pacific take a lesson from the Southern
Pacific, and instead of giving travellers offal at a dollar a head at
Green River and other eating-houses, give them good food of the Lathrop
kind for fifty cents? As I have said before, the wretched eating-houses
on the Union Pacific are maintained, confessedly, for the benefit
of the eating-houses, and the encouragement of local colonization;
but it is surely unfair on the "transient" to make him contribute,
by hunger, on the indigestion, and ill-temper, to the perpetration
of an imposition. On the Southern and the Texas Pacific there are
first-rate eating-places, some at fifty cents, some at seventy-five,
and, as we approach an older civilization, others at a dollar. But no
one can grudge a dollar for a good meal in a comfortable room with
civil attendance; while on the Union Pacific there is much to make
the passenger dissatisfied, besides the nature of the food, for it is
often served by ill-mannered waiters in cheerless rooms. Avery little
industry, or still less enterprise, might make other eating-places like
Humboldt.

It was at Lathrop that some Californians of a very rough type wished to
invade our sleeping-car. They wanted to know the "racket," didn't "care
if they had to pay fifty dollars," had "taken a fancy" to it, &c., &c.;
but the conductor, with considerable tact, managed to persuade them to
abandon their design of travelling like gentlemen, and so they got into
another car, where they played cards for drinks, fired revolvers out of
the window at squirrels between the deals, and got up a quarrel over it
at the end of every hand.

California Felix! Aye, happy indeed in its natural resources. For we
are again whirling along through prairies of corn-land, a monotony of
fertility that becomes almost as serious as the grassy levels of the
Platte, the sage-brush of Utah, or the gravelled sands of Nevada. And
so to Modesta, a queer, wide-streeted, gum-treed place, not the least
like "America," but a something between Madeira and Port Elizabeth.
It has not 2000 people in it altogether, yet walking across the dusty
square is a lady in the modes of Paris, and a man in a stove-pipe hat!
Another stretch of farm-lands brings us to Merced, and the county of
that name, a miracle of fertility even among such perpetual marvels
of richness. If I were to say what the average of grain per acre is,
English farmers might go mad, but if the printer will put it into some
very small type I will whisper it to you that the men of Merced grumble
at seventy bushels per acre. I should like to own Merced, I confess.
I am a person of moderate desires. A little contents me. And it is
only a mere scrap, after all, of this bewildering California. On the
counter at the hotel at Merced are fir-cones from the Big Trees and
fossil fragments and wondrous minerals from Yosemite, and odds and ends
of Spanish ornaments. The whole place has a Spanish air about it. This
used to be the staging-point for travellers to the Valley of Wonders,
but times have changed, and with them the Stage-route, so Merced is
left on one side by the tourist stream. Leaving it ourselves, we
traverse patches of wild sunflower, and then find ourselves out on wide
levels of uncultivated land, waiting for the San Joacquin (pronounced,
by the way, Sanwa-keen) canal, to bring irrigation to them. How the
Mormons would envy the Californians if they were their neighbours, and
the contrast is indeed pathetic, between the alkaline wastes of Utah
and the fat glebes of Merced!

At present, however, a nation of little owls possesses the uncultivated
acres, and ground squirrels hold the land from them on fief, paying,
no doubt, in their vassalage a feudal tribute of their plump,
well-nourished bodies. To right and left lies spread out an immense
prairie-dog settlement, deserted now, however; and beyond it, on
either side, a belt of pretty timbered land stretches to the coast
range, which we see far away on the right, and to the foot-hills--the
"Sewaliks" of the Sierra Nevada,--which rise up, capped and streaked
with snow, on the left.

Wise men read history for us backwards from the records left by ruins.
Why not do the same here with this vast City of the Prairie-Dogs
that continues to right and left of us, miles after miles? Once upon
a time, then, there was a powerful nation of prairie-dogs in this
place, and they became, in process of years, debauched by luxury, and
weakened by pride. So they placed the government in the hands of the
owls, whom they invited to come and live with them, and gave over the
protection of the country to the rattlesnakes, whom they maintained as
janissaries. But the owls and the rattlesnakes, finding all the power
in their own hands, and seeing that the prairie-dogs had grown idle
and fat and careless, conspired together to overthrow their masters.
Now there lived near them, but in subjection to the prairie-dogs, a
race of ground-squirrels, a hard-working, thick-skinned, bushy-tailed
folk; and the owls and the rattlesnakes made overtures to the ground
squirrels, and one morning, when the prairie-dogs were out feeding and
gambolling in the meadows, the conspirators rushed to arms, and while
the rattlesnakes and the ground-squirrels, their accomplices, seized
possession of the vacated city, the owls attacked the prairie-dogs
with their beaks and wings. And the end of it was disaster, utter and
terrible; and the prairie-dogs fled across the plains into the woodland
for shelter, but did not stay there, but passed on, in one desolating
exodus, to the foot-hills beyond the woodland. And then the owls and
the rattlesnakes and the ground-squirrels divided the deserted city
among them. And to this day the ground-squirrels pay a tribute of their
young to the owls and the rattlesnakes, as the price of possession and
of their protection. But they are always afraid that the prairie-dogs
may come back again some day (as the Mormons are going back to Jackson
County, Missouri), to claim their old homesteads; and so, whenever
the ground-squirrels go out to feed and gambol in the meadows, the
rattlesnakes remain at the bottom of the holes, and the owls sit on
sentry duty at the top. Isn't that as good as any other conjectural
history?

And then Madera, with its great canal all rafted over with floating
timber, and more indications, in the eating-house, of the neighbourhood
of the Big Trees and Yosemite. For this is the point of departure now
in vogue, the distance being only seventy miles, and the roads good.
But of the trip to Clark's, and thence on to "Yohamite" and to Fresno
Grove--hereafter. Meanwhile, grateful for the good meal at Madera, we
are again smoking the meditative pipe, and looking out upon Owl-land,
with the birds all duly perched at their posts, and their bushy-tailed
companions enjoying life immensely in family parties among the short
grass. Herds of cattle are seen here and there, and wonderful their
condition, too; and thus, through flat pastures all pimpled over
with old, fallen-in, "dog-houses," we reach Fresno. This monotony of
fertility is beginning to exasperate me. It is a trait of my personal
character, this objection to monotonous prosperity. I like to see
streaks of lean. Thus I begin to think of Vanderbilts as of men who
have done me an injury; and unless Jay Gould recovers his ground with
me, by conferring a share upon me, I shall feel called upon to take
personal exception to his great wealth. And now comes Fresno, a welcome
stretch of land that requires irrigation to be fruitful, a land that
only gives her favours to earnest wooers, and does not, like the rest
of California, smile on every vagabond admirer. Where the ground is
not cultivated, it forms fine parade-ground for the owls, and rare
pleasaunces for the squirrels. But what a nymph this same water is!
Look at this patch of greensward all set in a bezel of bright foliage
and bright with wild flowers! In mythology there is a goddess under
whose feet the earth breaks into blossoms and leaves. I forget her
name. But it should have been Hydore. And now, as the evening gathers
round, we see the outlines of the Sierras, away on the left, blurring
into twilight tints of blue and grey--and then to bed.

California is blest in the olive. It grows to perfection, and the
result is that the California is no stranger to the priceless luxury of
good oil, and can enjoy, at little cost, the delights of a good salad.
How often, in rural England, with acres of salad material growing
fresh and crisp all round me, have groaned at the impossibility of a
salad, by reason of the atrocious character of the local grocer's oil!
But in California all the oil is good, and the vegetable ingredients
of the fascinating bowl are superb. But in America there is a fatal
determination towards mayonnaise, and every common waiter considers
himself capable of mixing one. So that even in California your hopes
are sometimes blighted, and your good humour turned to gall, by fools
rushing in where even angels should have to pass an examination before
admission. A simpler salad, however, is better than any mayonnaise, and
once the proportions are mastered, a child may be entrusted with the
mixture.

The lettuce, by long familiarity, has come to be considered the true
basis of all salad, and in its generous expanse of faintly flavoured
leaf, so cool and juicy and crisp when brought in fresh from the
garden, it has certainly some claims to the proud position. But a
multitude of salads can be made without any lettuce at all, and it is
doubtful whether either Greece or Rome used it as an ingredient of
the bowl in which the austere endive and pungent onion always found a
place. Now-a-days however, lettuce is a deserving favourite, It has
no sympathies or antipathies, and no flavour strong enough to arouse
enthusiasm or aversion. It is not aggressive or self-assertive, but,
like those amiable people with whom no one ever quarrels, is always
ready to be of service, no matter what company may be thrust upon
it, or what treatment it has to undergo. Opinions of its own it has
none, so it easily adopts those of others, and takes upon itself--and
so distributes over the whole--any properties of taste or smell that
may be communicated to it by its neighbours. An onion might be rubbed
with lettuce for an indefinite period and betray no alteration in its
original nature, but the lettuce if only touched with onion becomes at
once a modified onion itself, and no ablution will remove from it the
suspicion of the contact. The gentle leaf is therefore often ill-used;
but, after all, even this, the meekest of vegetables, will turn upon
the oppressor, and if not eaten young and fresh, or if slaughtered with
a steel blade, will convert the salad that should have been short and
sharp in the mouth into a basin of limp rags, that cling together in
sodden lumps, and when swallowed conduce to melancholy and repentance.
The antithesis of the lettuce is the onion. Both are equally essential
to the perfect salad, but for most opposite reasons. The lettuce must
be there to give substance to the whole, to retain the oil and salt and
vinegar, to borrow fragrance and to look green and crisp. It underlies
everything else, and acts as conductor to all, like consciousness in
the human mind. It is the bulk of the salad so far as appearances go,
and yet it alone could be turned out without affecting the flavour of
the dish. It is only the canvas upon which the artist paints.

How different is the onion! It adds nothing to the amount, and
contributes nothing to the sight, yet it permeates the whole; not,
however, as an actual presence, but rather as a reflection, a shadow,
or a suspicion. Like the sunset-red, it tinges everything it falls
upon, and everywhere reveals new beauties. It is the master-mind in
the mixed assembly, allowing each voice to be heard, but guiding the
many utterances to one symmetrical result. It keeps a strong restraint
upon itself, helping out, with a judicious hint only, those who need
it, and never interfering with neighbours that can assert their own
individuality. I speak, of course, of the onion as it appears in the
civilized salad, and not the outrageous vegetable that the Prophet
condemned and Italy cannot do without. Some pretend to have a prejudice
against the onion, but as an American humourist--Dudley Warner--says,
"There is rather a cowardice in regard to it. I doubt not all men and
women love the onion, but few confess it."

In simplicity lies perfection. The endive and beetroot, fresh bean,
and potato, radish and mustard and cress, asparagus and celery,
cabbage-hearts and parsley, tomato and cucumber, green peppers and
capers, and all the other ingredients that in this salad or in that
find a place are, no doubt, well enough in their way; but the greatest
men of modern times have agreed in saying that, given three vegetables
and a master-mind, a perfect salad may be the result. But for the
making there requires to be present a miser to dole out the vinegar,
a spendthrift to sluice on the oil, a sage to apportion the salt,
and a maniac to stir. The household that can produce these four, and
has at command a firm, stout-hearted lettuce, three delicate spring
onions, and a handful of cress, need ask help from none and envy
none; for in the consumption of the salad thus ambrosially resulting,
all earth's cares may be for the while forgotten, and the consumer
snap his fingers at the stocks, whether they go up or down. There is
no need to go beyond these frugal ingredients. In Europe it is true
men range hazardously far afield for their green meat. They tell us,
for instance, of the fearful joy to be snatched from nettle-tops,
but it is not many who care thus to rob the hairy caterpillar of his
natural food; nor in eating the hawthorn buds, where the sparrows have
been before us, is there such prospect of satisfaction as to make us
hurry to the hedges. The dandelion, too, we are told, is a wholesome
herb, and so is wild sorrel; but who among us can find the time to
go wandering about the country grazing with the cattle, and playing
Nebuchadnezzar among the green stuff? In the Orient the native is never
at a loss for salad, for he grabs the weeds at a venture, and devours
them complacently, relying upon fate to work them all up to a good
end; and the Chinaman, so long as he can only boil it first, turns
everything that grows into a vegetable for the table.

But it would not be safe to send a public of higher organization into
the highways and ditches; for a rabid longing for vegetable food,
unballasted by botanical ledge, might conduce to the consumption Of
many unwholesome plants, with their concomitant insect evils. Dreadful
stories are told of the results arising from the careless eating of
unwashed watercress; and in country places the horrors that are said
to attend the swallowing of certain herbs without a previous removal
of the things that inhabit them are sufficient to deter the most
ravenously inclined from taking a miscellaneous meal off the roadside,
and from promiscuous grazing in hedge-rows.



CHAPTER XXV.

    The Carlyle of vegetables--The moral in blight--Bee-farms--The city
    Of Angels--Of squashes--Curious Vegetation--The incompatibility of
    camels and Americans--Are rabbits "seals"?--All wilderness and no
    weather--An "infinite torment of flies."

THE cactus is the Carlyle of vegetation. Here, in Southern California,
it assumes many of its most uncouth and affected attitudes, puts on all
its prickles and its angles, and its blossoms of rare splendour. Those
who are better informed than myself assure me that the cactus is a
vegetable. I take their word for it. Indeed, the cactus itself may have
said so to them. There is nothing a cactus might not do. But it surely
stands among plants somewhere where bats do among animals, and the
apteryx among birds. Look for instance at this tract of cactus which
we cross before Caliente. There are chair-legs and footstools, pokers,
brooms, and telegraph-poles; but can you honestly call them plants?

But stay a moment. Can you not call them plants? Look! See those
superb blossoms of crimson upon that footstool of thorns, those golden
stars upon the telegraph-pole yonder, those beautiful flowers of rosy
pink upon that besom-head. Yes, they are plants, and worthy of all
admiration, for they have the genius of a true originality, and the
sudden splendour of the flowers they put forth are made all the more
admirable by the surprise of them and the eccentricity. And with them
grows the yucca, that wonderful plant that sends up from its rosette
of bayonets--they call it the "Spanish bayonet" in the West--a green
shaft, six feet high, and all hung with white waxen bells. I got out of
the train at one of its stoppages, and cut a couple of heads of this
wonderland plant, and found the blossoms on each numbered between 400
and 406. And there was a certain moral discipline in it too. For we
found these exquisite flower-hung shafts were smothered in "blight,"
those detestable, green, sticky aphides, that sometimes make rose-buds
so dreadful, and are the enemy of all hothouses. Looking out at the
yuccas as we passed, those splendid coronals of waxen blossoms--pure
enough for cathedral chancels--it seemed as if they were things of a
perfect and unsullied beauty. My arrival with them was hailed with
cries of admiration, and for the first moment enthusiasm was supreme.
But the next, alas for impure beauty! the swarms of clinging parasites
were detected. Hands that had been stretched out to hold such things
of grace, shrank from even touching them, known to be polluted, and
so, at last, with honours that were more than half condescension,
the yucca-spikes were put out on the platform, to be admired from
a distance. Passing through the cactus land we saw numbers of tiny
rabbits--the "cotton tails," as distinguished from the "mule-ears"
or jack-rabbits--dodging about the stems and grass; but in about an
hour the grotesque vegetable began to sober down into a botanical
conglomerate that defies analysis, and gives the little rabbits a
denser covert. The general result of this change in the botany was as
Asiatic, as Indian as it could be, but why, it were difficult to say,
unless it was the prevalence of the baboon-like "muskeet," and the
beautiful but murderous dhatura--the "thorn-apple" of Europe. Yet there
was sage-brush enough to make Asia impossible, while the variations
of the botany were too sudden for any generalizations of character.
And so on, past an oil-mill on the left--petroleum bubbling out of the
hillock--and a great farm "Newhall's," on the right; past Andrews and
up the hill to the San Fernando tunnel, 7000 feet in length, and then
down the hill again into San Fernando. Has any one ever "stopped off"
at San Fernando and spent any time with the monks at their picturesque
old mission, smothered in orangeries, and dozed away the summer hours
amongst them, watching the peaches ripen and the bees gathering honey,
and opening bottles of mellow California wine to help along the
intervals between drowsy mass and merry meal-times? I think when my
sins weigh too heavily on me to let me live among men, I will retire to
San Fernando, to the bee-keeping, orange-growing fathers, ask them to
receive my bones, and start a beehive and an orange-tree of my own. It
does not seem to me, looking forward to it, a very arduous life, and I
might then, at last, overtake that seldom-captured will-o'-the-wisp,
fleet-footed Leisure.

The bees, by the way, are kept on a "ranch," whole herds and herds of
bees, all hived together in long rows of hives, hundreds to the acre.
They fly afield to feed themselves, and come home with their honey to
make the monks rich. I am not sure that these fathers have done all
they might for the country they settled in, and yet who is not grateful
to the brethren for the picturesqueness of comparative antiquity? Their
very idleness is a charm, and their quiet, comfortable life, half in
cloisters, half in orange groves, is a delight and a refreshment in
modern America.

But the loveliness of their country, and the wonder of its
possibilities! Can any one be surprised that we are approaching the
city of Los Angeles? A bright river comes tumbling along under cliffs
all hung with flowering creepers, and between banks that are beautiful
with ferns and flowers, and the land widens out into cornfield
and meadow; and away to right and left, lying under the hills and
overflowing into all the valleys, are the vineyards, and orchards, and
orangeries that make the City of Angels worthy of a king's envy and a
people's pride. As yet, of course, it is the day of small things, as
compared with what will be when water is everywhere; but even now Los
Angeles is a place for the artist to stay in and the tourist to visit.
There is a great deal to remind you of the East, in this valley of
dark-skinned men, and in the "bazaars," with their long ropes of chilis
dangling on the door-posts, the fruit piled up in baskets on the mules,
the brown bare-legged children under hats with wide ragged brims, there
are all the familiar features of Southern Europe, hot, strong-smelling,
and picturesque. But Los Angeles shares with the rest of California
the disadvantage under which all climates of great forcing power and
rudimentary science must lie, for its fruits, though exquisite to look
upon, often prodigious in size, and always incredible in quantity,
fail, as a rule, dismally in flavour. The figs are very large,
both green and black, but they seem to have ripened in a perpetual
rainstorm; the oranges look perfection, and are as bad as any I have
had in America; the peaches are splendid in their appearance, for their
coarse barbaric skins are painted with deep yellow and red, but they
ought not to be called "peaches" at all. They would taste just as well
by any other name, and the traveller who knows the peaches of Europe,
or the peaches of Persia, would not then be disappointed.

So away from Los Angeles, with its groups of idle, brown-faced men,
in their flap brimmed Mexican hats, leaning against the posts smoking
thin cigars, and its groups of listless, dark-eyed women, with bright
kerchiefs round their heads or necks, sitting on the doorsteps; away
through valleys of corn, broken up by orangeries and vineyards, where
the river flows through a tangle of willow and elder and muskeet; past
the San Gabriel Mission, overtaken, poor idle old fragment of the past,
by the railroad civilization of the present, and already isolated in
its sleepiness and antiquity from the busier, younger world about it;
on through a scene of perpetual fertility, orange groves and lemon,
fields of vegetables and corn, with pomegranates all aglow with scarlet
flowers, and eucalyptus-trees in their ragged foliage of blue and brown.

The squash grows here to a monstrous size. "I have seen them, sir,"
said a passenger, "weighing as much as yourself." The impertinence of
it! Think of a squash venturing to turn the scale against me. Perhaps
it will pretend that it has as good a seat on a horse? Or will it play
me a single-wicket match at cricket? I should not have minded so much
if it had been a water-melon, "simlin," or some other refined variety
of or even a the family. But that a squash, the 'poor relation' of the
pumpkin, should--. But enough. Let us be generous, even to squashes.

Some one ought to write the psychology of the squash. There is a very
large human family of the same name and character. If you ask what
the bulky, tasteless thing is good for, people always say, "Oh, for
a pie!" Now that is the only form in which I have tasted it. And I
can say, from personal experience, therefore, that it is not good for
that. It never hurts anybody, or speaks ill of any one--an inoffensive,
tedious, stupid person, too commonplace to be either liked or disliked.
Economical parents say squashes are "very good for children,"
especially in pies. They may be. But they are not conducive to the
formation of character.

Some one, too, ought to visit these old Franciscan missions in Southern
California--some one who could write about them, and sketch them.
They are very delightful; the more delightful, perhaps, because they
are in the United States, in the same continent as "live" towns, as
Chicago, and Omaha, and Leadville, and Tombstone. Scattered about among
the rolling grassland are hollows filled with orchards, in which old
settlements and new are fairly embowered, while the missions themselves
are singularly picturesque; and San Gabriel's Church, they say, has a
pretty peal of bells, which the monks carried overland from Mexico in
the old Spaniard days, and which still chime for vespers as sweetly as
ever. What a wonder it must have been to the wandering Indians to hear
that most beautiful of all melodies, the chime of bells, ascending with
the evening mists from under the feet of the hills! No wonder they had
campanile legends, these poor poets of the river and prairie, and still
speak of Valleys of Enchantment whence music may be heard at nightfall!

Past Savanna and Monte, with its swine droves, and its settlement
of men who live on "hog and hominy," past Puente, and Spadra, and
Pomona, into Colton, where we dine, and well, for half a dollar,
enjoying for dessert a chat with a very pretty girl. She tells us of
the beauties of San Bernardino, and I could easily credit even more
than she says. For San Bernardino was settled by Mormons some fifty
years ago, and has all the charms of Salt Lake City, with those of
natural fertility and a profusion of natural vegetation added. But I
can say nothing of San Bernardino, for the train does not enter it.
And then, reinforced by another engine--a dumpy engine-of-all-work
sort of "help"--clambers up the San Gorgonio pass. All along the road
I notice a yellow thread-like epiphyte, or air-plant, tangling itself
round the muskeet-trees, and killing them. They call it the "mistletoe"
here but it is the same curious plant that strangles the orange trees
in Indian gardens, and the jujubes in the jungles, that cobwebs the
aloe hedges, and hangs its pretty little white bells of flower all
over the undergrowth. On the bare, sandy ground a wild gourd, with
yellow flowers and sharp-pointed spear-head leaves, throws out long
strands, that creep flat upon the ground with a curious snake-like
appearance. Clumps of wild oleander find a frugal subsistence, and
here and there an elder or a walnut manages to thrive. But the profuse
fertility of California is fast disappearing. And so to Gorgonio, at
the top of the pass; and then we begin to go down, down, down, till we
are not surprised to hear that we are far below the level of the sea.
The cactus has once more reasserted itself, and to right and left are
"forests" of this grotesque candelabra-like vegetable, with stiff arms,
covered apparently with some woolly sort of fluff. The soil beneath
them is a desperate-looking desert-sand, and here and there are bare
levels of white glistening sterility. But water works such wonders that
there is no saying what may happen. At present, however, it is pure,
unadulterated desert--wilderness enough to delight a camel, were it not
for the quantity of stones which strew the waste, and which would make
it an abomination to that fastidious beast. Camels were once imported
into the country, but the experiment failed--and no wonder. Imagine the
modern American trying to drive a camel! The Mexican might do it, but I
doubt if any other race in all America could be found with sufficient
contempt for time, sufficient patience in idleness, sufficient
camelishness in fact, to "personally conduct" a camel train. There is
a tradition, by the way, that somewhere in Arizona, wild camels, the
descendants of the discarded brutes, are to be met with to this day,
enjoying a life without occupations.

At present the most formidable animal in possession of these cactus
plains is the rabbit. But such a licence of ears as the creature has
taken! It must be developing them as weapons of offence: the future
"horned rabbit." They call these long-eared animals "mules," and deny
that you can make a rabbit-pie of them. This seems to me hardly fair
on the rabbit. But in England the small rodent suffers under even more
pointed injustice.

A certain railway porter, it is said, was once sorely puzzled by a
tortoise which the owner wished to send by train. The official was
nonplussed by the inquiry as to which head of the tariff the creature
should be considered to fall under; but, at last, deciding that it was
neither "a dog" nor "a parrot" (the broad zoological classification in
use on British railways) pronounced the tortoise to be "an insect," and
therefore not liable to charge. This profound decision was prefaced
by a brief enumeration of the animals which the railway company call
"dogs." "Cats is dogs, and rabbits is dogs, and so is guinea-pigs,"
said the porter, "but squirrels in cages is parrots!"

But please note particularly the porter's confusion of identity with
regard to the rabbit. This excellent rodent is emphatically called "a
dog." But the rabbit knows much better than to mistake itself for a
dog. It might as well think itself a poacher.

Meanwhile, other attempts have been made to confuse it as to its own
individuality; and if the rabbit eventually gives itself up as a
hopeless conundrum, it is not more than might be expected. Its fur
is now called "seal-skin" in the cheap goods market; the fluke has
attacked it as if it were a sheep; while in recent English elections,
when the Ground Game Bill was to the front, it was a very important
factor. All the same, everybody goes on shooting it just as if it
were a mere rabbit. This, I would contend, is hardly fair; for if its
skin is really sealskin, the rabbit must, of necessity, be a seal,
and, as such, ought to be harpooned from a boat, and not shot at with
double-barrelled guns. It is absurd to talk of going out "sealing"
in gaiters, with a terrier, for the pursuit of the seal is a marine
operation, and concerned with ships and icebergs and whaling line. A
sportsman, therefore, who goes out in quest of this valuable pelt
should, in common regard for the proprieties, affect Arctic apparel;
and, instead of ranging with his gun, should station himself with a
harpoon over the "seal's" blow-hole, and, when it comes up to breathe,
take his chance of striking it, not forgetting to have some water handy
to pour over the line while it is being rapidly paid out, as otherwise
it is very liable to catch fire from friction. By this means the rabbit
would arrive at some intelligible conception of itself, and be spared
much of the discomfort which must now arise from doubts as to its
personality. Nothing, indeed, is so precious to sentient things as a
conviction of their own "identity" and their "individuality," and I
need only refer those who have any doubt about it to the whole range
of moral philosophy to assure themselves of this fact. If we were not
certain who we were two days running, much of the pleasure of life
would be lost to us.

We entered the arid tract somewhere near the station of the Seven
Palms. They can be seen growing far away on the left under the
"foot-hills." About half way through we find ourselves at the station
of Two Palms, but they are in tubs. Of course there may be others,
and no doubt are. But all you can see from the cars is a limited
wilderness. Yet on those mountains there, on the right--one is 12,000
feet--there is splendid pine timber; and on the other side of them,
incredible as it seems, are glorious pastures, where the cattle are
wading knee-deep in grass! For us, however, the hideous wilderness
continues. The hours pass in a monotony of glaring sand, ugly rock
fragments, and occasional bristly cactus. And then begins a low
chapparal of "camel-thorn" or "muskeet," and as evening closes in we
find ourselves at the Colorado River and at Yuma, where the sun shines
from a cloudless sky three hundred and ten days in the year.

And the weather? I have not mentioned it as we travelled along, for I
wished to emphasize it by bringing it in at the end of the chapter.
Well, the weather. There was none to speak of, unless you can call a
fierce dry over-heat, averaging 96 in the shade, weather. And this is
all that we have had for the last twelve hours or so; heat enough to
blister even a lizard, or frizzle a salamander. A hot wind, like the
"100" of the Indian plains, blew across the desperate sands, getting
scorched itself as it went, and spitefully passing on its heat to
us. It was as hot as Cawnpore in June; nearly as hot as Aden. And
then the change at Yuma! We had suddenly stepped from Egypt in August
into Lower Bengal in September--from a villainous dry heat into afar
more villainous damp one. The thermometer, though the sun had set,
was at and, added to all, was such a plague of mosquitoes as would
have subdued even Pharaoh into docility. The instant--literally, the
instant--that we stepped from our cars our necks, hands, and faces were
attacked, and on the platform everybody, even the half-breed Indians
loafing outside the dining-room, were hard at work with both hands
defending themselves from the small miscreants. The effect would have
been ludicrous enough to any armour-plated onlooker, but it was no
laughing matter. We were too busy slapping ourselves in two places at
once to think of even smiling at others similarly engaged; and the last
I remember of detestable Yuma was the man who sells photographs on the
platform, whirling his hands with experienced skill round his head and
packing up his wares by snatches in between his whirls.



CHAPTER XXVI.

THROUGH THE COWBOYS' COUNTRY.

    The Santa Cruz Valley--The Cactus--An ancient and honourable
    Pueblo--A terrible Beverage--Are Cicadas deaf?--A floral
    Catastrophe--The Secretary and the Peccaries.

YUMA marks the frontier between California and Arizona. But it might
just as well mark the frontier between India and Beluchistan, for it
reproduces with exact fidelity a portion of the town of Rohri, in
Sind. A broad, full-streamed river (the Colorado) seems to divide the
town into two; on the top of its steep bank stands a military post,
a group of bungalows, single-storied, white-walled, green-shuttered,
verandahed. On the opposite side cluster low, flat-roofed houses,
walled in with mud, while here and there a white-washed bungalow, with
broad projecting eaves, stands in its own compound. Brown-skinned
men with only a waistcloth round the loins loaf around, and in the
sandy spaces that separate the buildings lean pariah dogs lie about,
languid with the heat. The dreadful temperature assists to complete the
delusion, and finally the mosquitoes of the Colorado river have all the
ferocity of those that hatch on the banks of the Indus.

Against our will, too, these pernicious insects board our train and
refuse to be blown out again by all the draughts which we tax our
ingenuity to create. So we sit up sulkily in a cloud of tobacco smoke
far into the night and Arizona--watching the wonderful cactus-plants
passing our windows in gaunt procession, and here and there seeing a
fire flash past us, lit probably by Papajo Indians for the preparation
of their abominable "poolke" liquor. But the mosquitoes are satisfied
at last, and go to sleep, and so we go too.

We awake in the Santa Cruz Valley, with the preposterous cactus
poles and posts standing up as stiff and straight as sentries "at
attention," and looking as if they were doing it for a joke. There is
no unvegetable form that they will not take, for they mimic the shape
of gate posts, semaphores, bee-hives, and even mops--anything, in
fact, apparently that falls in with their humour, and makes them look
as unlike plants as possible. I am not sure that they ought not to
be punished, some of them. Such botanical lawlessness is deplorable.
But, after all, is not this America, where every cactus "may do as
he darned pleases"? These cacti, by the way--the gigantic columnar
species, which throws up one solid shaft of flesh, fluted on each side,
and studded closely with rosettes of spines--are the same that crowd
in multitudinous impis on the side of the hills which slope from the
massacre-field of Isandula in Zululand, down to the Buffalo River. How
well I remember them!

If it were not for the cactus it would be a miserably uninteresting
country, for the vegetation is only the lowest and poorest looking
scrub, and water as yet there is none. But now we are approaching what
the inhabitants call "the ancient and honourable pueblo of Tucson,"
pronouncing it Too son, and ancient and honourable we found it--For
does it not dispute with Santa Fe the title of the most ancient town in
the United States? and was not the breakfast which it gave us worthy of
all honour?

It takes, reader, as you will have guessed, a very long journey indeed
to knock into a traveller's head a complete conception of the size
of North America. Mere space could never do it, for human nature is
such that when trying to grasp in the mind any great lapse of time or
territory, the two ends are brought together as it were, and all the
great middle is forgotten. Nor does mere variety of scene emphasize
distance on the memory, for the more striking details here and there
crowd out the large monotonous intervals. Thus a mile of an Echo canyon
obliterates half a state's length of Platte Valley pastures, and a
single patch of Arkansas turtle-swamp whole prairies of Texan meadow.
But in America, even though many successive days of unbroken travel
may have run into one, or its many variations--from populous states to
desert ones, from timber states to pasture ones, from corn states to
mineral ones, from mountain to valley, river to lake, canyoned hills to
herd-supporting prairies, from pine forest to oak forest, from sodden
marsh to arid cactus-land--may have got blurred together, there grows
at the end of it all upon the mind a befitting sense of vastness which
neither linear measurement in miles nor variety in the panorama fully
explain. It is due, I think, to the size of the instalments in which
America puts forward her alternations of scene. She does not keep
shifting her suits, so as to spoil the effect of her really strong
hand, but goes on leading each till she has established it, and made
each equally impressive. You have a whole day at a time of one thing,
and then you go to sleep, and when you wake it is just the same, and
you cannot help saying to yourself: "Twenty-four successive hours of
meadowland is a considerable pasturage," and you do not forget it ever
afterwards. The next item is twenty-four hours of mountains, "all of
them rich in metals;" and by the time this has got indelibly fixed
on the memory, Nature changes the slide, and then there is rolling
corn-land on the screen for a day and night. And so, in a series of
majestic alternations, the continent passes in review, and eventually
all blends into one vast comprehensible whole.

Apart from physical, there are curious ethnological divisions which
mark off the continent into gigantic subnationalities. For though the
whole is of course "American," there is always an underlying race, a
subsidiary one so to speak, which allots the vast area into separate
compartments. Thus on the eastern coast we have the mulatto, who gives
place beyond Nebraska to the Indian, and he, beyond Nevada, to the
Chinaman. After California comes the Mexican, and after him the negro,
and so back to the East and the mulatto again.

Here in Arizona, at Tucson, the "Mexican" is in the ascendant, for
such is the name which this wonderful mixture of nationalities prefers
to be called by. He is really a kind of hash, made up of all sorts of
brown-skinnned odds and ends, an olla podrida. But he calls himself
"Mexican," and Tucson is his ancient and honourable pueblo. It is a
wretched-looking place from the train, with its slouching hybrid men,
and multitudinous pariah dogs. Indians go about with the possessive
air of those who know themselves to be at home; and it is not easy to
decide whether they, with their naked bodies and ropes of hair dangling
to the waist, or the half-breed Mexican with their villainous slouch
and ragged shabbiness, are the lower race of the two. And the dogs!
they are legion; having no homes, they are at home everywhere. I am
told there is a public garden, and some "elegant" buildings, but as
usual they are on "the other side of the town." All that we can see on
this side, are collections of squalid Arabic-looking huts and houses,
made of mud, low-roofed and stockaded with ragged-looking fences. The
heat is of course prodigious for eight months of the year, and the
dust and the flies and the mosquitoes are each and all as Asiatic as
the heat--or any other feature of this ancient and honourable It has
its interest, however, as an American pueblo. It has its interests,
however, as an American "antiquity;" while the river, the Santa Cruz,
which flows past the town, is one of those Arethusa streams, which
comes to the surface a few miles above the town and disappears again a
few miles below it.

For the student of hybrid life, Tucson must have exceptional
attractions; but for the ordinary traveller, it has positively none.
Kawai Indians have not many points very different from Papajo Indians,
and mud hovels are after all only mud hovels. But it is an ancient and
honourable pueblo.

The only people who look cool are the Mexican soldiers in blue and
white, and that other Mexican, a civilian, in a broad-brimmed, flimsy
hat, spangled with a tinsel braid and fringe. Have these men ever
got anything to do? and when they have, do they ever do it? It seems
impossible they could undertake any work more arduous than lolling
against a post, and smoking a yellow-papered cigarette. Yet only a few
days ago these Mexicans, perhaps those very soldiers there, destroyed a
tribe of Apaches, and then arrested a force of Arizona Rangers who had
pursued the Indians on to Mexican ground! These Apaches had kept the
State in a perpetual terror for a long time, but finding the Federal
soldiers closing in upon them, they crossed the frontier line close to
Tucson, and there fell in with the Mexicans, who must at any rate be
given the credit for promptitude and efficiency in all their Indian
conflicts. The Apaches were destroyed, and the force of Rangers who
had followed them were caught by the Mexican general, and under an old
agreement between the two Republics, they were made prisoners of war,
disarmed, and told to find their way back two hundred and fifty miles
into the States as best and as quickly as they could. Some thirty years
ago a Mexican general, who captured some American filibusters in a
similar way at the village of Cavorca, paraded his captives and shot
them all down. So the Arizona men were glad enough to get away.

The cactus country continues, and the plants play the mountebank more
audaciously than ever. There is no absurdity they will not commit, even
to pretending that they are broken fishing rods, or bundles of riding
whips. But the majority stand about in blunt, kerb-stone fashion, as
if they thought they were marking out streets and squares for the
cotton-tail rabbits that live amongst them. Under the hill on the left
is the old mission church of "San'avere" (San Xavier); and over those
mountains, the "Whetstones," lies the mining settlement of Tombstone,
where the cowboys rejoice to run their race, and the value of life
seldom rises to par in the market. Then we enter upon a plain of the
mezcal all in full bloom, and a "lodge" of brown men, partly Indian,
partly Mexican, waiting it may be for the plant to mature and the time
to come round for distilling its fiery liquor. I tasted mezcal at El
Paso for the first time in my life, and I think I may venture to say
the last, so whether it was good of its kind or not, I cannot tell. I
am no judge of mezcal. But I know that it was thick, of a dull sherry
colour, with a nasty vegetable smell, and infinitely more fiery than
anything I ever tasted before, not excepting the whisky which the
natives in parts of Central India brew from rye, the brandy which the
Boers of the Transvaal distil from rotten potatoes, or the "tarantula
juice" which you are often offered by the hearty miners of Colorado. It
is almost literally "fire-water;" but the red pepper, I suppose, has as
much to do with the effect upon the tongue and palate as the juice of
the mezcal.

On a sudden, in the midst of this desolate land, we come upon a ranche
with cattle wading about among the rich blue grass; but in a minute it
is gone, and lo! a Chinese village, smothered in a tangle of shrubs all
overgrown with creeping gourds, with the coolies lying in the shade
smoking long pipes of reed.

Have you ever smoked Chinese "tobacco"? If not, be careful how you do.
A single pipe of it (and Chinese pipes hold very little) will upset
even an old smoker. For myself, can hardly believe it is tobacco, for
in the hand it feels of a silky texture, utterly unlike any tobacco
I ever saw, while the smell of it, and the taste on the tongue, are
as different to the buena yerba as possible. It is imported by the
Chinese in America for their own consumption, and in spite of duties
is exceedingly cheap. A single sniff of it, by the way, completely
explains that heavy, stupefying odour which hangs about Chinese
quarters and Chinese persons.

But this glimpse of China has disappeared as rapidly as the ranche had
done, and in a few minutes later a collection of low mud-walled huts,
overshadowed by rank vegetation, an ox or two trying to chew the cud
in an uptilted cart, some brown-skinned children playing with magnolia
blossoms, and lo! a glimpse of Bengal.

And then as suddenly we are out again on to the cactus plains with
cotton-tail rabbits everywhere, and cicadas innumerable shrilling from
the muskeet trees. Above all the noise of the train we could hear the
incessant chorus filling the hot out-of-doors, and, stepping on to the
rear platform, I found that several had flown or been blown on to the
car. Poor helpless creatures, with their foolish big-eyed heads and
little brown bodies wrapped up in a pair of large transparent wings.
But fancy living in such a hideous din as these cicadas live in! Do
naturalists know whether they are deaf? One would suppose of course
that the voice was given them originally for calling to each other in
the desolate wastes in which they are sometimes found scattered about.
But in the lapse of countless generations that have spent their lives
crowded together in one bush, sitting often actually elbow to elbow and
screaming to each other at the tops of their voices, it is hardly less
rational to suppose that kindly Nature has encouraged them to develop a
comfortable deafness. At any rate it is impossible to suppose that even
a cicada can enjoy the ear-splitting clamour in which its neighbours
indulge, and which now keeps up with us all the way as we traverse the
San Pedro Valley, and mounting from plateau to plateau--some of them
fine grass land, others arid cactus beds--reach another "Great Divide,"
and then descend across an immense, desolate prairie, brightened here
and there with beautiful patches of flowers, into the San Simon Valley.
And all the time we eat our dinner (at the Bowie station) the cicadas
go on shrilling, on the hot and dusty ground, till the air is fairly
thrilling, with the waves of barren sound. That sounds like rhyme,--and
I do not wonder at it,--for even the cicadas themselves manage to drift
into a kind of metre in their arid aimless clamour, and the high noon,
as we sit on our cars again, looking out on the pink-flowered cactus
and the mezcal with its shafts of white blossoms, seems to throb with a
regular pulsation of strident sound.

What a desolate land it seems, this New Mexico into which we have
crossed! But not for long. We soon find ourselves out upon a vast
plain of grassland, upon which the sullen, egotistical cactus will not
grow. "You common vegetables may grow there if you like," it says.
"Any fool of a plant can grow where there is good soil; but it shows
genius to grow on no soil at all." So it will not stir a step on to
the grass-land, but stands there out on the barren sun-smitten sand,
throwing up its columns of juicy green flesh and bursting out all over
into flowers of vivid splendour, just to show perhaps that "Todgers's
can do it when it likes." There is about the cactus' conduct something
of the superciliousness of the camel, which wades through hay with
its nose up in the air as if it scorned the gross provender of vulgar
herds, and then nibbles its huge stomach full of the tiny tufts of
leaves which is found growing among--the topmost thorns of the scanty
mimosa.

Here, on this plain, is plenty of the "camel thorn," the muskeet, and
a whole wilderness of Spanish bayonet waiting till some one thinks it
worth while to turn it into paper, and there is not probably a finer
fibre in the world. Nor, because the cactus contemns the easy levels,
do other flowers refuse to grow. They are here in exquisite profusion,
a foretaste of the Texan "flower-prairies," and when the train stopped
for water I got out and from a yard of ground gathered a dozen
varieties. Nearly all of them were old familiar friends of English
gardens, and some were beautifully scented, notably one with a delicate
thyme perfume, and another that had all the fragrance of lemon verbena.

Both to north and south are mountains very rich in mineral wealth,
and at Lordsburg, where we halted, I could not resist the temptation
of buying some "specimens." I had often resisted the same temptation
before, but here somehow the beauty of the fragments was irresistible.
Outside the station, by the way, under a heap of rubbish, were lying a
score or so of bars of copper bullion, worth, perhaps, twenty pounds
apiece. Such bulky plunder probably suits nobody in a climate of
everlasting heat, but it is all pure copper nevertheless--pennies en
bloc.

The plain continues in a monotony of low muskeet scrub, broken here
and there by flowering mezcal. It is utterly waterless, and, except
for one fortnight's rain which it receives, gets no water all the
year round. Yet beautiful flowers are in blossom even now, and what
it must be just after the rain has fallen it is difficult to imagine.
To this great flower-grown chapparal succeeds a natural curiosity of
a very striking kind--a vast cemetery of dead yuccas. It looks as if
some terrific epidemic had swept in a wave of scorching death over the
immense savannah of stately plants. Not one has escaped. And there they
stand, thousand by thousand, mile after mile, each yucca in its place,
but brown and dead. And so through the graveyards of the dead things
into Deming--Deming of evil repute, and ill-favoured enough to justify
such a reputation. Even the cowboy fresh from Tombstone used to call
Deming "a hard place," and there is a dreadful legend that once upon
a time, that is to say, about ten years ago, every man in the den had
been a murderer! No one would go there except those who were conscious
that their lives were already forfeited to the law, and who preferred
the excitement of death in a saloon fight to the dull formalities of
hanging. However, tempora mutantur, and all that I remember Deming for
myself is its appearance of dejection and a very tolerable supper.

And then away again, across the same flower-grown meadow, with its
sprinkling of muskeet bushes, and its platoons of yucca, but now all
radiant in their bridal bravery of waxen white. The death-line of the
beautiful plant seems to have been mysteriously drawn at Deming. I got
out at a stoppage and cut two more of the yuccas. The temptation to
possess such splendour of blossom was too great to resist. But alas!
as before, the dainty thing in its virginal white was hideous with
clinging parasites, and so I fastened them into the brake-wheel on the
platform, and sitting in my car smoking, could look out at the great
mass of silver bells that thus completely filled the doorway, and in
the falling twilight they grew quite ghostly, the spectres of dead
flowers, and touching them we find the flowers all clammy and cold.
"How it chills one!" said a girl, holding a thick, white, damp petal
between her fingers. "It feels like a dead thing."

And sitting out in the moonlight--an exquisite change after the
hateful heat of the day thfit was past--we saw the muskeet growth
gradually dwindle away, and then great lengths of wind-swept sand-dunes
supervened. And every now and then a monstrous owl--the "great grey owl
of California," I think it must have been--tumbled up off the ground
and into the sky above us. Otherwise the desolation was utter. But I
sat on smoking into the night, and was abundantly repaid after awhile,
for the country, as if weary of its monotony, suddenly swells up into
billows and sinks into huge troughs, a land-Atlantic that beats upon
the rocks of the Colorado range to right and left; and as we cut our
way through the crests of its waves, the land broke away from before
us into bay--like recesses; crowned with galleries of pinnacled rock
and curved round into great amphitheatres of cliff. But away on the
left it seemed heaving with a more prodigious swell, and every now and
then down in the hollows I thought I could catch glimpses of moon-lit
water glittering. And the train sped on, winding in and out of the
upper ridges of the valley brim, and then, descending, plunged into
a dense growth of willows, and lo! the Rio Grande, and "the shining
levels of the mere." It was it then, this splendid stream, that had
been disturbing the land so, thrusting the valley this way and that,
shaping the hills to its pleasure, and that now rolled its flood along
the stately water-way which it had made, with groves of trees for reed
beds and a mountain range for banks!

We cross it soon, seeing the Santa Fe line pass underneath us with
the river flowing underneath it again--and then with the Rio Grande
gradually curving away from us, we reach El Paso. And it is well
perhaps for El Paso, that we see it under the gracious witchery of
moonlight, for it is a place to flee from. Without one of the merits
of Asia, it has all Asia's plagues of heat and insects and dust. And
no one plants trees or sows crops; and so, sun-smitten, and waterless,
it lies there blistering, with all its population of half-breeds
and pariah dogs, a place, as I said, to flee from. And yet on the
other side of the river, a rifle-shot off, is the Mexican town of El
Paso--for the river here separates the States from their neighbour
Republic--and there, there are shade trees and pleasant houses,
well-ordered streets, and all the adjuncts of a superior civilization.

A brawl alongside the station platform, with a horrible admixture of
polyglot oaths and the flash of knives, is the only incident of El Paso
life we travellers had experience of. But it may be characteristic.

One of the party who had been incidentally concerned in the
disagreement travelled with us. He knew both New and Old Mexico well,
and among other things which he told me I remember that he said that
he had seen peccaries in New Mexico, on the borders of Arizona. I had
thought till then that this very disagreeable member of the pig family
confined itself to more southern regions.

Treed by pigs is not exactly the position in which we should expect
to find a Colonial Secretary--at least, not often. But when one of
the Secretaries in Honduras was recently exploring the interior of
the country, he was overtaken by a drove of peccaries, and had only
time to take a snap shot at the first of them and scramble up a tree,
dropping his rifle in the performance, before the whole pack were
round his perch, gnashing their teeth at him, grunting, and sharpening
their tusks against his tree. Now the peccary is not only ferocious
but patient, and rather than let a meal escape it, it will wait about
for days, so that the Secretary had only two courses--either to remain
where he was till he dropped down among the swine from sheer exhaustion
and hunger, or else to commit suicide at once by coming down to be
killed there and then. While he was in this dilemma, however, what
should come along--and looking out for supper too--but a jaguar.
Never was beast of prey so opportune! For the jaguar has a particular
fondness for wild pork, and the peccaries know it, for no sooner did
they see the great ruddy head thrust out through the bushes than they
bolted helter-skelter, forgetting, in their anxiety to save their own
bacon, the meal they were themselves leaving up the tree. The jaguar
was off after the swine with admirable promptitude, and the Secretary,
finding the coast clear, came down--reflecting, as he walked towards
the camp, upon the admirable arrangements of Nature, who, having made
peccaries to eat Colonial Secretaries, provided also jaguars to eat the
peccaries.

And so to sleep, and sleeping, over the boundary into Texas.



CHAPTER XXVII.

    American neglect of natural history--Prairie-dogs again; their
    courtesy and colouring--Their indifference to science--A hard
    crowd--Chuckers out--Makeshift Colorado.

"HAVE we struck another city?" I asked on awaking, and finding the
train at a standstill.

"No, sir," said the conductor, "only a water-tank."

"You see," I explained, "there are so many 'cities' on the Railway
Companies' maps that one hardly dares to turn one's head from the
window, lest one should let slip a few--so I thought it best to ask."

No, it didn't look like a country of many cities. It was Texas. And the
grazing land stretched on either side of us to the horizon, without
even a cow to break the dead level of the surface. It was patched,
however, with wildflowers. Yellow verbena and purple grew in acres
together. And then the breakfasting station suddenly overtook us. It
was called Coya, and we ate refuse. When we complained, the man and his
wife--knock-kneed folk--deplored almost with tears their distance from
any food supply, and vowed they had done their best. And while they
vowed, we starved on damaged tomatoes; and on paying the man I gave him
advice to go and buy some potter's field with the proceeds, and to act
accordingly.

What I hate about being starved is, that you can't smoke afterwards.
The best part of a good meal is the pipe afterwards, and the more ample
the meal the better the subsequent weed. But on a pint of bad tomatoes
no man can smoke with comfort to his stomach. But I ate bananas till
I thought I had qualified for tobacco, and with my pipe came more
kindly thoughts. Outside the cars the country was doing all it could to
soothe me, for the meadows were fairly ablaze with flowers. They were
in distracting profusion and of beautiful kinds. I knew most of them
as garden and hothouse flowers in England, but not their names; the
verbenas, however, were unmistakable, and so was the "painted daisy."
It suffices, however, that the country seemed a wild garden as far as
the eye could reach, yellow and orange being as usual the prevailing
colours.

This determination of wild flowers to these colours is a point worth
the notice of science. And why are the very great majority of Spring
flowers yellow?

One of my companions called this distraction of colour a
"weed-prairie," which reminds me to say that it is perfectly amazing
how indifferent the present generation of Western Americans are to the
natural history of their country. They cannot easily mistake a crow or
a rose. But all other birds, except "snipe" and "prairie chickens,"
seem to be divided into "robins" and "sparrows;" and all flowers, the
sunflower and the violet, into lilies and primroses. They have not had
time yet, they say, to notice the weeds and bugs that are about. But,
in the meantime, a most appalling confusion of nomenclature is taking
root. As with eatables and other things, the emigrants to the States
have taken with them from Europe the names of the most familiar flowers
and birds, and anything that takes their fancy is at once christened
with their names.

As the sun rose the population of these painted meadows came abroad,
multitudes of rabbits, a few "chapparal hens," and myriads--literally
myriads--of brilliant butterflies.

And so on for a hundred miles. And then Texas gets a little tired of
so much level land and begins to undulate. Dry river-beds are passed,
and then a muskeet "chapparal" commences, and with it a prodigious
city of prairie-dogs. But the inhabitants are partially civilized. The
train does not alarm them in the least. It does not even arouse their
curiosity. They sit a few feet off the rails, with their backs to the
passing trains. Perhaps they may look over their shoulders at it. But
they do not interrupt their gambols nor their work for such a trifle
as a train. They eat and squabble and flirt--do anything, in fact, but
run away. Now and then, as if out of good taste and not to appear too
affected, they make a show of moving a little out of the way. But the
motive is so transparent that the trivial change of position counts for
nothing. The jack-rabbit imitates the prairie-dog, just as the Indian
imitates the white man, and pretends that it too does not care about
the train. But there is an expression on its ears that betrays its
nervousness; and why, too, does it always manage to get under the shady
side of the nearest bush?

One thing more about the prairie-dog, and I have done with him. The
soil east of Colorado city changes for a while in colour, being
reddish. Before this it had been sandy. And the prairie-dog alters its
colour to suit its soil. You might say of course that the dust round
its burrows tinged its fur, just as dust will tinge anything it settles
on. But it is a fact that the fur itself is redder where the soil is
redder, and that in the two tracts the little animal assimilates itself
to the ground it sits upon. And the advantage is obvious. Dozens of
prairie-dogs sitting motionless on the soil harmonized so exactly with
their surroundings that for a time I did not observe them. Detecting
one I soon learned to detect all. Now one of the grey prairie dogs on
the red soil would have been very conspicuous, just as conspicuous in
fact as a red one would have been trying to pass unobserved on the
lighter soil.

The undulations now increase into valleys, and splendid they are, with
their rich crops of wild hay and abundant life. The train stops at
a "station" (I am not sure that it has earned a name yet), and some
cowboys, and dreadful of their kind, get on to the train. But it is
only for an hour or so. But during that hour the prairie-dogs had much
excitement given them by the perpetual discharging of revolvers into
the middle of their family parties. It is impossible to say whether any
of them were hit, for the prairie-dog tumbles into his hole with equal
rapidity, whether he is alive or dead. But I hope they escaped. For I
have a great tenderness for all the small ministers of Nature, in fur
and in feathers.

    "Their task in silence perfecting, Still working, blaming still our
    vain turmoil, Labours that shall not fail, when man is gone."

And yet I would be reluctant to say that their indifference to express
trains should be encouraged. I don't like to see prairie-dogs thus
regardless of the latest triumphs of science. And so if the cowboys'
revolvers frightened them a little, let it pass.

The train stopped again at another "station," and our cowboy passengers
got out, being greeted by two evil-looking vagabonds lying in the shade
of a shrub. The meeting of these worthies looked unmistakably like that
of thieves re-assembling after some criminal expedition. All alike
seemed eager to converse, but they evidently had to wait till the train
was gone. One man had a bundle which he held very tight (so it seemed
to us) between his legs. A few muttered sentences were exchanged, the
speakers turning their heads away from the train while they talked,
and the rest assuming a most ludicrous affectation of indifference
to what was being said. We started off, and looking out at them from
the rear platform of the car, I saw they were already in full talk.
Their animated gestures were almost as significant as words. Had I
referred to the conductor I might have saved myself all conjecture. For
mentioning my suspicions to him, he said, "Oh, yes! Those Rangers who
got off at Coya are after that crowd: and they're a hard crowd too."

They were, without doubt, a terribly "hard crowd" to look at, these
cowboy-men. In England they would probably have followed "chucking out"
as a profession. I remember in a police court, during election time,
seeing some hulking victims of the police charged with "rioting." But
they pleaded, in justification of turbulence, that they were "chuckers
out of meetings!" They had been captured when expelling the supporters
of a rival candidate from a public hall with the fag ends of furniture,
and made no attempt at concealment of their misdemeanour. They were
paid, they said, to chuck out, and chucked out accordingly, to the best
of their intelligence and ability, and when overpowered by the police
attempted no subterfuge. Their stock-in-trade were broad shoulders and
prodigious muscle. For any odd job of fancy work they would perhaps
provide themselves with a few old eggs or put a dead cat or two into
their pockets. But, as a rule, when they went out to business they took
only their fists and their hob-nailed boots with them, relying upon
the meeting room to provide them with table legs and chairs. As soon
as the signal for the disturbance was given, the chuckers-out "went
for" the furniture, and, armed with a convenient fragment, looked about
for people whom they ought to chuck. There were plenty to choose from,
for a meeting consists, as a rule, of several or more persons, and the
chuckers-out having marked down a knot of the enemy, would proceed
to eject them, individually if refractory, in a body if docile, and
would thus, if unopposed by police, gradually empty the room. There is
something very humorous in this method of invalidating an obnoxious
orator's arguments, for nothing weakens the force of a speech so much
as the total absence of the audience. Nevertheless, the chucker-out
sees no humour in his job. It is all serious business to him, and so he
goes through his chucking with uncompromising severity. Now and then,
perhaps, he expels the wrong man, or visits the political offences
of an enemy upon the innocent head of one of his own party; but in
political discussions with the legs of tables and brickbats, such
mistakes can hardly help occurring.

And the beautiful undulating meadows continue, sprinkled over with
shrub-like trees, and populous with rabbits and prairie-dogs and
chapparal hens. Here and there we come upon small companies of cattle
and horses, most contented with their pastures; but what an utter
desolation this vast tract seems to be! The "stations" are, as yet,
mere single houses, and we hardly see a human being in an hour. And
then comes Colorado, a queer makeshift-looking town, with apparently
only one permanent place of habitation in it--the jail.

Beyond the town we passed some Mexicans supposed to be working, but
apparently passing time by pelting stones at the snakes in the water,
and soon after stopped to take up some Texan Rangers for the protection
of our train during the night. These Rangers reminded me very much of a
Boer patrol, and there is no doubt that both cowboys and Indians find
them far too efficient for comfort. They are, as a rule, good shots,
and all are of course good riders. The pay is good, and, "for a spell"
as one of them said, the work was "well enough." And as the evening
closed in, and we began to enter a country of dark jungle-looking land,
the scene seemed as appropriate as possible for a Texan adventure. But
nothing more exciting than cicadas disturbed our sleep. Somebody said
they were "katydids," but they were not--they were much katydider.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

    Nature's holiday--Through wonderful country--Brown negroes a libel
    on mankind--The wild-flower state--The black problem--A piebald
    flirt--The hippopotamus and the flea--A narrow escape--The home of
    the swamp-gobblin--Is the moon a fraud?

IN the morning everything had changed. Vegetation was tropical. Black
men had supplanted brown. Occasional tracts of rich meadow, with
splendid cattle and large-framed horses wading about among the pasture,
alternated with brakes of luxuriant foliage concealing the streams that
flowed through them, while fields of cotton in lusty leaf, gigantic
maize, and league after league of corn stubble, showed how fertile the
negro found his land. And the wild flowers--but what can I say more
about them? They seemed even more beautiful than before.

There is something very striking and suggestive in these impressive
efforts of Nature to command, at recurring intervals, a recurring
homage. Thus, for one interval of the year the rhododendron holds an
undivided empire over the densely-wooded slopes of the great Himalayan
mountains in India. All the other beauties of mountain and valley
are forgotten for that interval of lovely despotism, and every one
who can, goes up to see "the rhododendrons in bloom." Nature is very
fond of such "tours de force," thinking, it may be, that men who see
her every-day marvels and grow accustomed to them require now and
then some extra-ordinary display, like the special festivals of the
ancient Church, to evoke periodically an extraordinary homage. Lest
the migration of creatures should cease to be a thing of wonder to us,
Nature organizes once in a way a monster excursion, sometimes of rats,
sometimes of deer, but most frequently of birds, to remind man of the
marvellous instinct that draws the animal world from place to place or
from zone to zone. For the same reason, perchance, she ever and again
drives butterflies in clouds from off the land out on to the open sea,
and, that the perpetual miracle of Spring may not pall upon us, she
gives the world in succession such breadths and tones of colour that
even the callous stop to admire the sudden gold of the meadows, the
hawthorn lying like snowdrifts along the country, the bridal attire of
the chestnuts, or the blue levels of wild hyacinth. As the priestess of
a prodigious cult, Nature decrees at regular intervals, for the delight
and discipline of humanity, a public festa, or universal holiday, to
which the whole world may go free, and wonder at the profusion of her
beauties.

The track was, in places, very poor indeed, the cars jumping so much
as to make travelling detestable and travellers "sea-sick." And
then Dallas, with an execrable breakfast, and away again into the
wonderful country, with cattle perpetually wandering on to the track
and refusing to hear the warning shriek of the engine. The country was
richly timbered with oak and willow and walnut, with park-like tracts
intervening of undulating grassland. Here the stock wandered about in
herds as they chose, and except for a chance tent, or a shanty knocked
together with old packing-cases and canvas, there was no sign of
human population. But in the timbered country every clearing had the
commencement of a settlement, the tumble-down rickety habitation with
which the African, if left to his own inclinations, is content. And
wonderfully picturesque they looked, too, these efforts at colonization
in the middle of the forests, with the creepers swinging branches of
scarlet blossoms from the trees, and the foliage of the plantains,
maize and sugar-cane brightening the sombre forest depths. But the heat
must be prodigious, and so must the mosquitoes.

It was Sunday, and after their kind the children of Ham were taking
"rest." Parties of negresses all dressed in the whitest of white, with
bright-coloured handkerchiefs on their heads, or hats trimmed with
gaudy ribands and flowers, and sometimes wearing, believe me, gloves,
were promenading in the jungle with their hulking, insolent-mannered
beaux. They looked like gorillas masquerading. In his native country
I sincerely like the negro. But here in America I regret to find him
unlovely. I am told that individual negroes have done wonders. I know
they have. But this does not alter my prejudice. I think the brownish
American negro of to-day is the most deplorable libel on the human
race that I have ever encountered. And I cannot help fearing that
America has a serious problem growing into existence in the South. The
brown-black population is there formulating for itself, apart from
white supervision, ideas of self-government, morality, "independence,"
and even religion, that may make any future intervention of a better
class a difficult matter, or may eventuate in the contemporary
growth of two sharply-defined castes of society. I find the opinion
universally entertained in America that the brownish-black man is not
a sound or creditable basis for a community, and now that I have seen
in what numbers and what prosperity he has established himself in the
South, I cannot but think that he may be found in the future an awkward
factor in the body politic and social.

The country in fact appears to be breeding helots as fast as it can for
the perplexity of the next generation.

To the north of us as we travelled was a large Indian reservation, and
at more than one station I saw them crouching about the building. But I
should not have mentioned them had it not been that I saw a white man
trying to buy a cradle from a squaw. He offered $20 for it, but she
would not even turn her head to look at the money. It is quite possible
that the mother thought he was bargaining for the papoose as well as
the cradle. But I was assured that these women sometimes expend an
incredible amount of labour and indeed (for Indians) of money also upon
their papoose-panniers. One case was vouched for of an offer of $120
being refused, the Indians stating that there were $80 worth of beads
upon the work of art, and that it had taken eleven years to complete.

How beautiful Texas is! And what a future it has! For half a day and
a night we have been traversing grazing-land, and for half a day
fine timber growing in a soil of intense fertility. And now for half
a day we are in a pine country, sometimes with wide levels of turf
spreading out among the trees, sometimes with oak and walnut so thickly
intermingled with the pines that the whole forms a magnificent forest.
Passion-flowers entangle all the lower undergrowth, and up the dead
trees climbs that fine scarlet creeper which is such an ornament of
well-ordered gardens of some English country houses. But here in Texas
the people, as usual, have not had time yet to think of adornments,
and their ugly shanties therefore remain bare and wooden. They are of
course only ugly in themselves, that is to say, in material, shape, and
condition, for their surroundings are delightful and location perfect.
There is of course a good deal of "the poetry of malaria," as I heard a
charming lady say, about some of these sites. For it is impossible to
avoid the suspicion of agues and fevers in those splendid clearings,
with the rich foliage mobbing each patch of cotton, grapes, or maize.

Whenever we happen to slacken pace near one of them an interesting
glimpse of local life is caught. Negroidal women come to the doors or
suddenly stand up in the middle of the crops in which, working, they
were unperceived. From the undergrowth, the ditches, and from behind
fences, appear dusky children, numbers of them, a swart infantry that
seems to me to fill the future with perplexity. Are these swarms going
to grow up a credit to the country? Have they it in their breed to be
fit companions in progress of the progeny of the best European stocks?

The abundance of wild life, too, is very noticeable. Wherever we stop
we become aware of countless butterflies and insects busy among the
foliage, and the voices of strange birds resound from the forest depths.

But other sites appear to me perfection. Take Marshall for instance,
or Jefferson. Which is the more beautiful of the two? Some of the
"commercial" settlements, just beginning life with a railway-station,
six drug stores, and seven saloons, have situations that ought to have
been reserved for honeymoon Edens. They are "hard" places. Law as yet
there is none except revolver law, and that is pitiless and sudden and
wicked. For Texas, the beautiful flower state, blessed with turf and
blessed with pines, has still the stern commencements of American life
before it--that rapid, fierce process of civilization which begins with
cards and whisky and murder, which finds its first protection in the
"Vigilantes" who hold their grim tribunals under the roadside trees,
but which suddenly one day wrenches itself, as it were, from its bad,
lawless past, and takes its first firm step on the high road to order
and prosperity and the world's respect. For every intelligent traveller
these ragged, half-savage, settlements should have a great significance
and interest. Before he dies they may be Chicagos or San Franciscos.
And these men, with their mouths full of oaths and revolvers on their
hips, are the fathers of those future cities. They will have no
immortality though in the gratitude of posterity. For they will shoot
each other of in those saloons, or the Rangers will shoot them down on
the flower prairies beyond the forests. But they will have done their
work nevertheless. Nature in every part of her scheme proceeds on the
same system of building foundations upon ruins. Whole nations have to
be killed off when they have prepared and preserved the ground as it
were for those that are to follow. Whether they are nations of men,
or of beasts, or of plants, she uses them in exactly the same way.
Everything must subserve the ultimate end.

But I did not intend to moralize. The negress waiter at Longview (where
we dine very badly) reminds me how practical life should be. She never
stops to moralize. On the contrary, she just stands by the window,
swallowing all the peaches and fragments of pudding that the travellers
leave on their plates. Two he negroes wait upon us. But it looks as if
they were there to feed the negress rather than to feed us. For they
keep rushing in with full dishes to us and rushing off with the half
empty ones to her. And there she stands omnivorous, insatiable, black.
Everything that is brought to her of a sweet kind she swallows. Not as
if she enjoyed it, but as if she must. It was like throwing things into
a sink. She never filled up.

And then, through the splendid tropical country, to Marshall. I must
return to Marshall, Texas, some day and be disillusioned, or else I
shall go down to my grave accusing myself of having passed Paradise in
the train, and not "stopped off" there. What an exasperating reflection
for a deathbed! I should never forgive myself. But perhaps it is not
so beautiful as it seems. In any case studies "from the life" would
be immensely interesting. I caught a few glimpses which entertained
me prodigiously. There was the negro dandy walking painfully in
patent-leather boots that were made for some man with ordinary feet,
with a fan in his hand and a large flower in his button-hole, an old
stove-pipe hat on his head, and a very corpulent handleless umbrella
under his arm. There was another, similarly caparisoned, escorting
three belles for a walk in the neighbouring jungle, the ladies all
wearing white cloth gloves and black cloth boots that squelched out
spaciously as they put their feet down. And alas! there was the black
coquette, with her bunch of crimson flowers behind her ear, her black
satin skirt and white muslin jacket, her parasol of black satin
lined with crimson--and how she flirts up the green slope, with a
half-acre smile on her face! She looks back at every other step to see
which, if any, of the black men, or the brown, or the yellow, on the
station platform is going to follow her expansive charms, and so she
disappears, this piebald siren, into the groves, her parasol flashing
back Parthian gleams of crimson as she goes. But every one, man, woman,
or child, black, brown, or yellow, was a study, so I must go back to
Marshall some day.

At present, however, we are whirling away again through the lovely
woodland, and the whole afternoon passes in an unbroken panorama of
forest views, with great glades of meadow breaking away to right and
left, and patches of maize and cotton suddenly interrupting the stately
procession of timber. And then Jefferson. Is Jefferson more prettily
situated than Marshall? I cannot say. But Jefferson lies back among
the trees with an interval of orchard and corn-land between it and the
railway line, and looks a very charming retreat indeed. A fat negro
comes on board on duty of some kind connected with the brake, and
a witty little half-breed boy comes on after him. The fat negro is
the brown boy's butt. And he nearly bursts with wrath at the hybrid
urchin's chaff, and threatens, between gasps, a retaliation that cannot
find utterance in words. But the brown boy is relentless, and though
the train is rapidly increasing in its speed, he clings to the step and
taunts the negro who dare not leave his look-out post. But he knows
very well where the fat man will get off, and suddenly, with a parting
personality, the little wretch drops off the step, just as a ripe apple
might drop off a branch. And then the fat man has to get off. The speed
is really dangerous, but he climbs down the steps backwards, thinking
apparently only of his tormentor, and still breathing forth fire and
slaughter; and then lets go. Is he killed? Not a bit of it. He lands on
his feet without apparently even jarring his obese person, and when we
look back, we see that he is already throwing stones at the small boy,
whose batteries are replying briskly. I wonder if the hippopotamus ever
caught the flea? And if he did, what he did to him?

And I remember how the Somali boys in Aden used to drive the bo'sun to
the verge of despair by clambering on to the ship and pretending not to
see him working his way round towards them with a rope's end behind his
back, and how at the very last moment, almost as the arm was raised to
strike, the young monkeys used to drop off backwards into the sea, like
snails off a wall.

But is this Bengal or Texas that we are traveling through? The
vegetation about us is almost that of suburban Calcutta, and the heat,
the damp steamy heat of low-lying land, might be the Soonderbuns. And
here befell an adventure. We were nearing Atalanta. The train was on a
down grade and going very fast indeed, perhaps half a mile a minute. I
was sitting on my seat in the Pullman with the table up in front of me
and reading. At the other end of the car was a lady with some children
sitting with their backs to me. Further off, but also with his back to
me, was the conductor. Each "section" of a car has two windows. The
one at my left elbow had the blind drawn down. The other had not. On a
sudden at my ear, as it seemed, there was a report as of a rifle; the
thick double glass of the window in front of me flew into fragments all
over me, and the woodwork fell in splinters upon my book. I instantly
pulled up the blind of the other window and looked out to see who had
"fired." But of course at the speed we were going, there was no one in
sight. I called out to the conductor that some one had fired through
the window. He had not heard the explosion, nor had the lady. So their
surprise was considerable. And while I was looking in the woodwork
for the bullet I expected to find, the conductor picked off my table
a railway spike! Some wretch had thrown it at the passing train, and
the great velocity at which we were travelling gave the missile all
the deadly force of a bullet. "An inch more towards the centre of the
window, sir, and you might have been killed," said the brakeman. A
look at the splintered woodwork, and the bullet-like groove which the
sharp-pointed abomination had cut for itself, was suffcient to assure
me that he was right. But think of the atrocious character of such
mischief. The man who did it probably never thought of hurting any one.
And yet he narrowly missed having a horrible crime on his head. "If
we could have stopped the train and caught him, we would have lynched
him," said the conductor. "A year or two ago a miscreant threw a corn
cob into a window, very near this spot too. It struck a lady, breaking
her cheek bone, and bursting the ball of her left eye. We stopped the
train, caught the man, and hanged him by the side of the track then and
there."

And then Atalanta, in a country that is very beautiful, but with that
poetry of malaria which suggests a peril in such beauty. And gradually
the land becomes swampy, and the old trees, hung with moss, stand
ankle-deep in brown stagnant water. The glades are all pools, and
where-ever a vista opens, there is a long bayou stretching down between
aisles of sombre trees. It is wonderful in its unnatural beauty, this
forest standing in a lagoon. The world was like this when the Deluge
was subsiding. There is a mysterious silence about the gloomy trees.
Not a bird lives among them. But in the sullen water, there are turtles
moving, and now and then a snake makes a moment's ripple on the dull
pools. Sunlight never strikes in, and as I looked, I could not help
remembering all the horrors of the slave-hunt, and the murder at the
end of it, in the dark depths of some such horrid brake as these we
pass. What a spot for legends to gather round! Has no one ever invented
the swamp-goblin?

For an hour and more we pass through this eerie country, and then
comes a change to higher land with a splendid growth of pine and
walnut and oak all healthily rooted in dry ground. But towards evening
we come again into the swamps, and the sun goes down rosy-red behind
the water-logged trees, till their trunks stand out black against
the ruddy sky and the pools about their feet take strange tints of
copper and purpled bronze. And suddenly we flash across the track
of the narrow-gauge line to New Orleans--and such a sight! The line
pierces an avenue, straight as an arrow, for miles and miles through
the belt of forest. On either side along the track lie ditches filled
with water. But to-night the ditches seem filled with logwood dye, and
the wonderful vista through the deep green trees is closed as with a
curtain, by the crimson west!

It was only a glimpse we got of it, but as long as I live I shall never
forget it, the most marvellous sight of all my life.

No, not even sunrise upon the Himalayas, nor the moonlight on the
palm-garden in Mauritius--two miracles of simple loveliness that are
beyond words--could surpass that glimpse through the Texan forest. It
was not in the least like this earth. Beyond that crimson curtain might
have been heaven, or there might have been hell. But I am not content
to believe that it was merely Louisiana.

And now comes Texakharna with its sweltering Zanzibar heat, but an
admirable supper to put us into good humour, and a beautiful moonlight
to sit and smoke in. If the sunset was weird, the moonlight was
positively goblinish. Such gloom! Not darkness remember, but gloom,
blacker than darkness, and yet never absolutely impenetrable. At least
so it seemed, and the fire-flies, flickering in thousands above the
undergrowth and up among the invisible branches, helped the fancy.
And the frogs! Was there ever, even in India in "the rains," such a
prodigious chorus of batrachians? And the katydids! Surely they were
all gone mad together. But it was a delightful ride. Sometimes in the
clearings we caught glimpses of negro parties, the white dresses of the
women glancing in and out along the paths, and the sound of singing
coming from the huts in the corners of the maize-patches.

Here at the corner of a clearing stands a cottage, a regular fairy-tale
cottage "by the wood," and in the moonlight it looked as if, "really
and truly," the walls were made of toffy and the roof was plum-cake. At
any rate there were great pumpkins on the roof, just such pumpkins as
those in which Cinderella (after they had turned into coaches) drove
to the Prince's ball. And I would bet my last dollar on it that the
lizards that turned into horses were there too, and the rats, and in
the marsh close by you might have a large choice of frogs to change
into coachmen.

And yet, I cannot help thinking, there is a good deal of false
sentiment expended upon the moon, the result of a demoralizing humility
which science has taught the inhabitants of "the planet we call Earth."
We are for ever being warned by our teachers against the sin of pride,
and being told that the universe is full of "Earths" just as good as
ours, and perhaps better. We are not, they say, to fancy that our own
world is something very special, for it is only a little ball, spinning
round and round in the firmament, among a number of other balls which
are so superior to it that if our own insignificant orange came in
contact with them we should get the worst of the collision. Nor are
we to fancy that the moon is our private property, and grumble at her
shabbiness, as our planetary betters have a superior claim to their
share of her, and this sphere of ours ought to be very thankful for as
much of the luminary as it gets.

Now, to my thinking, there is something distinctly degrading in this
view. Englishmen maintain patriotically that Great Britain is the
Queen of the Sea; why, then, should not we Earthians, with a larger
patriotism, say that our planet is the best planet of the kind in the
firmament, and, putting on one side all petty territorial distinctions,
boldly challenge the supremacy of the Universe itself? Depend upon it,
if any presumptuous moon-men or Jupiterites were to descend to Earth
and begin to boast, they would be very soon put down, and I do not see,
therefore, why we should not at once call upon all the other stars
and comets to salute our flag whenever we sail past them on the high
seas of the Empyrean. As it is, we are taught timidity by science, and
told that whenever a filibustering comet or meteor--the pirates and
privateers of the skies--comes along our way we are to expect instant
combustion, or something worse. Why are they not made to drop their
colours by a shot across their bows? or why, when we next see a meteor
bearing down upon us, should we not steer straight at it, and, using
Chimborazo or Mount Everest, or the dome of St. Paul's, or the Capitol
at Washington as a ram, sink the rascal? A broadside from our volcanic
batteries, Etna and Hecla, Vesuvius, Erebus, and the rest would soon
settle the matter, and we should probably hear no more for a long time
to come of these black-flagged craft who go cruising about to the
annoyance of honest planets. The same unbecoming apprehensions are
entertained with regard to the moon. Yet it is absurd that we should be
afraid of her. The Earth, by its velocity and weight, could butt the
moon into space or smash her into all her original fragments, could
bombard her with volcanoes, or put an earthquake under her and make a
ruin of her, or turn the Atlantic on to her and put her out. The moon
is really our own property, something between a pump and a night light,
and, if the truth must be told, not very good as either. Twice a day
she is supposed to raise the water of our oceans, but we have often
had to complain of her irregularity; and every night she ought to be
available for lighting people home to their beds, but seldom is. As a
rule, our nights are very dark indeed, owing to her non-attendance;
and even when she is on duty the arrangements she makes for keeping
clouds off her face are most defective. If the Earth were to be half as
irregular in the duties which she has to perform there would soon be
a stoppage of everything, collisions at all the junctions, accidents
at the level crossings, planets telescoped in every direction, and
passengers and satellites much shaken, if not seriously injured. But
the Earth is business-like and practical, and sets an example to those
other denizens of the firmament which are perpetually breaking out in
eruptions, getting off the track, and going about in disorderly gangs
to the public annoyance. Why, then, we ask, ought our planet to be
for ever taking off its hat to the flat-faced old moon, who is always
trying to show off with borrowed light, makes such a monstrous secret
of her "other side," is perpetually being snubbed by eclipses, and made
fun of by stars that go and get occultated by her?

But there are objections to discarding the luminary, for it is never a
graceful act to turn off an old dependant, and, besides, the moon is
about as economical a contrivance as we could have for keeping up the
normal average of lunatics, giving dogs something to bark at by night
when they cannot see anything else, and affording us an opportunity of
showing that respect for antiquities which is so becoming.

But what business the Man in the Moon has there, remains to be
decided; and who gave him permission to go collecting firewood in
our moon, remains to be seen. For it is well to remember that a very
distinguished French savant has proved that the moon is the private
property of the Earth. We used, he says, to do very well without a moon
once upon a time; but going along on our orbit one day, we picked up
the present luminary--then a mere vagabond, a disreputable vagrant mass
of matter, with no visible means of subsistence--"and shall, perhaps,
in the future pick up other moons in the same way." As a matter of fact
then, he declares the moon to be a dependant of our Earth, and says
that if we were selfishly to withdraw our "attraction" from it, the
poor old luminary would tumble into space, and never be able to stop
herself, or, worse still, might come into collision with some wandering
comet or other, and get blown up entirely. We ought, therefore, to
think kindly of the faithful old creature; but we should not, all the
same, allow any length of service to blind us to the actual relations
between her and ourselves--much less to make us frightened of the moon.

But the man in the moon should be seen to. He is either there or he is
not. If he is, he ought to pay taxes: and if he is not, he has no right
to go on pretending that he is.



CHAPTER XXIX.

    Frogs, in the swamp, and as a side-dish--Negroids of the swamp
    age--Something like a mouth--Honour in your own country--The Land
    Of Promise--Civilization again.

ARKANSAS remains on the mind (and the traveller's notebook) as a
vast forest of fine timber standing in swamps. There are no doubt
exceptions, but they do not suffice to affect the general impression.
And if I owned Arkansas I think I should rent it to some one else to
live in; especially to some one fond of frogs. For myself, I feel no
tenderness towards the monotonous batrachian. Even in a bill of fare
the tenderness is all on the frog's side. But on the whole, I like him
best when he is cooked. In the water with his "damnable iteration" of
Yank! yank! yank! I detest him--legs and all. But served "a cresson,"
with a clear brown gravy, I find no aggressiveness in him. It gets
cooked out of him: he becomes the gentlest eating possible. Butter
would not melt in his mouth, though it does on his legs. There is
none of the valiant mouse-impaling "mud-compeller" about him when you
foregather with him as a side dish. Aristophanes would not recognize
him, and the "nibbler of cheese rind" might then triumph easily over
him. Yet to think how once he shuddered the earth, and shook Olympus!
The goddess that leans upon a spear wept for him, and Aphrodite among
her roses trembled.

But here in Arkansas, on a hot night in "the Moon of Strawberries,"
what a multitudinous horror they are these "tuneful natives of the
reedy lake!" Like the laughter of the sea, beyond arithmetic. Like
the laughter of the sea, beyond arithmetic. Like the complainings of
the plagued usurers in Hell, beyond compassion. I cannot venture my
pen upon it. It is like launching out upon "the tenth wave," for an
infinite natation upon cycles of floods. It is endless; snakes with
tails in their mouths; trying to correct the grammar of a Mexican's
English.

But, seriously; was ever air so full of sound as these Arkansas swamps
"upon a night in June!" It fairly vibrates with Yank! yank! yank! And
yet over, and under, and through, all this metallic din, there shrills
supreme the voice of strident cicadas, without number and without
shame, and countless katydids that scream out their confidences to all
the stars. It is really astonishing; a tour de force in Nature; a noisy
miracle. I wonder Moses did not think of it, for such a plague might
have done him credit, I think. At all events, the ancestors of Arabi
Pasha would have been egregiously inconvenienced by such a hubbub. It
is no use trying to talk; yank--Katy did--yank--yank. That is all you
hear. So you may just as well sit and smoke quietly, and watch the
moon-lit swamps and wonderful dark forests go by, with their perpetual
flicker of restless fire-flies, twinkling in and out among the
brushwood. If they would only combine into one central electric light!
All the world would go to see them--the new "Brush-light." But there is
very little sense of utility among fire-flies. They flicker about for
their own amusement, and are of a frivolous, flighty kind; perpetually
striking matches as if to look for something, and then blowing them out
again. They strike only on their own box.

But here comes a station--"Hope." We are soon past Hope; and then
comes another swamp, with its pools, that have festered all day long
in the sun, emitting the odours of a Zanzibar bazaar, and standing in
the middle of them apparently are some clearings already filled with
crops, and a hut or two cowering, as if they were wild beasts, just on
the edge of the timber where the shadows fall the darkest. What kind
of people are they that live in this terraqueous land? No race that is
fit to rule can do it. No, nor even fit to vote. Some day, no doubt,
the wise men of the world will dig up tufts of wool, and skulls with
prognathous jaws, and label them "Negroids of the swamp age." Or they
may fall into the error of supposing that the wool grew all over their
bodies equally, and some Owen of the future discourse wisely of "the
great extinct anthropoids of Arkansas." For in those wonderful days
that are coming--when men will know all about the wind-currents, and
steer through ocean-billows by chart, when doctors will understand the
smallpox, and everybody have the same language, currency, religion,
and customs duties, and when every newspaper offce will be fitted with
patent reflectors, showing on a table in the editor's room all that
is going on all over the world, and special correspondents will be as
extinct as dodos, and when many other delightful means of saving time
and trouble will have come to pass--then, no doubt, as the Mormons say,
all the world will have become a "white and a delightsome people," and
the commentators will explain away the passages in the ancient English
which seem to point to the early existence of a race that was as black
as coals, and lived on pumpkins in a swamp.

And still we sit up, long past midnight, for never again in our lives
probably shall we have such an experience as this, so unearthly in
its surroundings--forests that crowded in upon the rails and hung
threateningly over the cars, pools that lay glistening in the moonlight
round the foot of the trees, the air as thick as porridge with the
yanking of brazen-throated frogs, and the screaming of tinlunged
cicadas, yet all the time alive with lantern-tailed insects--just
as if the clamour of frogs and cicadas struck fireflies out of each
other in the same way that flint and steel strike flashes, or as if
their recriminations caught fire like Acestes' arrows as they flew,
and peopled the inflammable air with phosphorescent tips of flame--a
battery of din perpetually grinding out showers of electric sparks.

And to make us remember this night the cars bumped abominably over
the dislocated sleepers and the sunken rails, as the Spanish father
whipped his son that he might never forget the day on which he saw a
live salamander; and the engine flew a streamer of sparks and ink-black
smoke, till it felt as if we were riding to Hades on a three-legged
dragon. But it came to sleep at last, and we went to bed, leaving the
moonlit country to the vagaries of the fireflies and the infinite
exultations of the frogs.

Awaking in the morning with "the grey wolf's tail" still in the sky,
what a wonderful change had settled on the scene! The same swamped
forests on either side of us: the same gloomy trees and the same
sulky-looking pools; but a dull leaden Silence supreme! Where were
the creatures that had crowded the moonlight? You might live a whole
month of mornings without suspecting that there were any such things in
Arkansas as frogs or katydids or fireflies!

I should have gone to sleep again if I had not caught sight of our new
porter, or brakeman. He happened to be laughing, and the corners of
his mouth, so it seemed to me, must have met behind. I need hardly say
he was a negro. But at first I thought he was a practical joke. I took
the earliest opportunity of looking at the back of his neck, to see
what kept his head together when he laughed. But I only saw a brass
button. I should not have thought that was enough to keep a man's skull
together, if I had not seen it. And he was always laughing, so that
there was nearly as much expression on the back of his head as on the
front. He laughed all round.

I felt inclined to advise him to get his mouth mended, or to tell him
about "a stitch in time." But he seemed so happy I did not think it
worth while.

Is it worth while saying that the swamp forest continued? I think not.
So please understand it, and think of the country as a flooded forest,
with wonderful brown waterways stretching through the trees, just as
glades of grass do elsewhere, with here and there, every now and again,
a broad river-like bayou of coffee stretching to right and left, and
winding out of sight round the trees, and every now and again a group
of wooden cabins, most picturesquely squalid, and inhabited by coloured
folk.

Does anybody know anything of these people? Are they cannibals,
or polygamous, or polyandrous, or amphibious? Surely a decade of
unrestricted freedom and abundant food in such solitudes as these, must
have developed some extraordinary social features? At all events, it is
very difficult to believe that they are ordinary mortals.

The hamlets are few and far between, and it is only once or twice
during the day that we strike a village nomine dignus. Looking at a
garden in one of these larger hamlets, I notice that the hollyhock and
pink and petunia are favourite flowers; and it is worth remarking that
it is with flowers as with everything else--the imported articles are
held in highest esteem. Writing once upon tobacco cultivation in the
East, I remember noting that each province between Persia and Bengal
imported its tobacco from its next neighbour on the west, and exported
its own eastward. It struck me as a curious illustration of the
universal fancy for "foreign" goods. So with flowers. It is very seldom
that the wild plants of a locality arrive at the dignity of a garden.
In England we sow larkspurs; in Utah they weed them out. In England we
prize the passion-flower and the verbena; in Arkansas they carefully
leave them outside their garden fences. And what splendid flowers these
people scorn, simply because they grow wild! Some day, I expect, it
will occur to some enterprising settler that there is a market abroad
for his "weeds;" and that lily-bulbs and creeper-roots are not such
rubbish as others think.

Then Poplar Bluff, a crazy-looking place, with many of its houses built
on piles, and a saloon that calls itself "the XIOU8 saloon." I tried
to pronounce the name. Perhaps some one else can do it. Then the swamp
reasserts itself, and the forest of oak and walnut, sycamore and plane.
But the settlements are singularly devoid of trees, whether for fruit
or shade. The people, I suppose, think there are too many about already.

And now we are in Missouri--the Mormons' 'land of promise,' and the
scene of their greatest persecutions. It is a beautiful State, as
Nature made it; but it almost deserves to be Jesse-Jamesed for ever for
its barbarities towards the Mormons. No wonder the Saints cherish a
hatred against the people, and look forward to the day when they shall
come back and repossess their land. For it is an article of absolute
belief among the Mormons, that some day or other they are going back to
Jackson County, and numbers of them still preserve the title-deeds to
the lands from which they were driven with such murderous cruelty.

It was here that I saw men working a deposit of that "white earth"
which has done as much to bring American trade-enterprise into
disrepute as glucose and oleomargerine put together. In itself a
harmless, useless substance, it is used in immense quantities for
"weighting" other articles and for general adulteration; and I
could not help thinking that the man who owns the deposit must feel
uncomfortably mean at times. But it is a paying concern, for the world
is full of rascals ready to buy the stuff.

And, after all, one half the world lives by poisoning the other.

A thunderstorm broke over the country as we were passing through it,
and I could not help admiring the sincerity of the Missouri rain.
There was no reservation whatever about it, for it came down with a
determined ferocity that made one think the clouds had a spite against
the earth. Moss Ferry, a ragged, desolate hamlet, looked as if it was
being drowned for its sins; and I sympathized with pretty Piedmont
in the deluge that threatened to wash it away. But we soon ran out
of the storm, and rattling past Gadshill, the scene of one of Jesse
James' train-robbing exploits, and sped along through lovely scenery of
infinite variety, and almost unbroken cultivation, to Arcadia.

But this is "civilization." In a few hours more I find myself back
again at the Mississippi, the Indus of the West, and speeding along its
bank with the Columbia bottom-lands lying rich and low on the other
side of the prodigious river, and reminding me exactly of the great
flat islands that you see lying in the Hooghly as you steam up to
Calcutta--past the new parks which St. Louis is building for itself,
and so, through the hideous adjuncts of a prosperous manufacturing
town, into St. Louis itself.

Out of deference to St. Louis, I hide my Texan hat, and disguise myself
as a respectable traveller. For I have done now with the wilds and the
West, and am conscious in the midst of this thriving city that I have
returned to a tyrannical civilization.

And I take a parting cocktail with the Western friend who has been my
companion for the last three thousand miles.

"Wheat," says he, with his little finger in the air.

And I reply, "Here's How."

THE END.



LONDON:

PRINTED BY GILDERT AND RIVINGTON, LIMITED, ST. JOHN'S SQUARE.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sinners and Saints, by Phil Robinson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SINNERS AND SAINTS ***

***** This file should be named 54079-8.txt or 54079-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/0/7/54079/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Steven
Fluckiger, Mariah Averett, and Lauren McGuinness.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


